
Chapter 0
Introduction
The title of this book, WAKE UP! TIME IS RUNNING OUT, is a very sobering statement. We do not know when our time on earth will end. If Jesus comes back soon, then our time will end. If He tarries, our individual time will end at death. Either way, time is short. Now is the time to prepare for your future, both here on earth and in heaven. What are you going to do with the time you have left? Spend it wisely because it is all of the time you have to prepare for eternity.
1 Corinthians 11:28-30 says, “But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of the bread and drink of the cup. For he who eats and drinks in an unworthy manner eats and drinks judgment to himself, not discerning the Lord’s body. For this reason many are weak and sick among you, and many sleep.” This warning specifically applies to participating in the act of communion (the Lord’s Supper), but it can also be figuratively applied to your personal communion with the Lord. It is time to examine yourself (verse 28). Are you spiritually asleep?
I want to share some important truths with you.
Embracing these truths will set you on the right course for developing a deep and personal relationship with Jesus Christ. These truths changed my life. If you will believe and obey them, they will change your life as well.
Some truths in this book are repeated many times. They are repeated because they are crucial and life-changing. If you do not take them seriously, your spiritual life will not change.
/page(1)

Who is the Problem?
Early in my walk with the Lord, I found it very difficult to move into God’s presence and even more difficult to stay there for any length of time. I wanted to have the fellowship with God that the Bible spoke of, but this kind of relationship did not seem normal or easy for me or anyone I knew. At the time, that felt discouraging, and I came to the conclusion that something was seriously wrong. Either the Bible was wrong or what Christianity accepted as normal was wrong, so I chose to believe the Bible was right. That meant I was wrong.
If you do not accept this conclusion as truth, you are wasting your time reading this book. Before going any farther, you must accept that you are the problem if your relationship with God is not as it should be.
I came to the conclusion that if my life did not line up with the Bible, then there were no excuses for it. There were only reasons. When I began to search the Scriptures for those reasons (while being led by the Holy Spirit), I began to make progress. I discovered that the reasons could be identified and removed through repentance until there were no more reasons.
As this process continued, I began to change. Old things began to pass away and all things became new (2 Corinthians 5:17). My walk with God began to align with the rightly divided Word of truth (2 Timothy 2:15). As I became more comfortable with this process, I asked God to show me my greatest hindrances first. As I processed those hindrances through repentance, my growth dramatically increased.
What You Think You Know...
The devil uses many tricks to keep Christians from becoming spiritual and growing up spiritually. We must not be ignorant of his devious lies. God has given me many truths that expose the devil’s plans. God wants all of His children to
/page(2)

know these truths. I have been sharing truth with Christians for over forty years. I have traveled to over one hundred different nations around the world. I have shared with believers from many cultural and denominational backgrounds. Some have had ears to hear while others have not. I have been astounded by the large number of Christians who do not know the basic truths God wants His children to know.
A few years ago I asked the Father, “What is the main reason Your children do not know what You want them to know?” He answered, “What they think they know hinders them from knowing what I want them to know.” I asked God what that meant. He replied, “When you think you know something, whether it is the truth or not, you release your faith into it. From that point on, this is what you believe about that particular subject. You no longer seek any more information on the topic because you already believe you know the truth. If someone tries to share something different with you, you will usually resist it because what they say is contrary to what you believe. You believe you are right, so they must be wrong. This is not a problem if what you believe is the truth, but what if it is actually a lie?”
How Do You Recognize Truth?
Proverbs 14:12 says, “There is a way that seems right to a man, But its end is the way of death.” One of satan’s most effective weapons against Christians is the way that seems right. He comes as an angel of light (2 Corinthians 11:14) and puts thoughts in your mind that seem true. If you do not bring those thoughts captive to Christ (2 Corinthians 10:5) and properly test them, satan can easily bring you to conclusions that seem right to your reasoning and understanding.
Only God knows what truth is. He has given us the Holy Spirit to reveal and confirm truth. The Holy Spirit is called the
/page(3)

Spirit of truth in John 16:13. “...And it is the Spirit who bears witness, because the Spirit is truth” (1 John 5:6b).
Sadly, I have discovered through my many years of traveling around the world that few Christians properly test what they believe. They do not ask the Spirit to reveal truth to them nor do they seek the Spirit’s confirmation about what they believe to be truth. The proof of this failing is evident in the many different beliefs Christians have on the same doctrines. We are divided because we use natural reasoning and understanding to determine what we believe to be truth rather than ask the Spirit to reveal the truth.
1 Corinthians 2:14 says, “But the natural man does not receive the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness to him; nor can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned.” In this chapter, Paul explains the difference between the natural and the spiritual. God and His kingdom are spiritual and they can only be spiritually understood. Only the Holy Spirit can reveal spiritual things. The mind of man cannot and will never be able to understand spiritual things because they must be spiritually discerned.
If you want to be sure something is the truth before you release your faith into it, you must first test it properly. If you are not yet able to properly test every thought you have, at least take the time to test the conclusions you come to before releasing your faith into them as truth.
2 Corinthians 10:5 says, “Casting down arguments and every high thing that exalts itself against the knowledge of God, bringing every thought into captivity to the obedience of Christ.” The way God taught me to test my conclusions involved the entire Godhead. I share about this in detail in the booklet, Three Infallible Witnesses. (I strongly suggest you study this booklet and apply its revelations to your daily walk with God.) You need to practice these principles until they work consistently and accurately. The three witnesses are:
/page(4)

* The rightly divided Word of God, Jesus (John 1:1, 2 Timothy 2:15).
* The witness of the Holy Spirit (1 John 5:6b).
* The peace of God the Father that passes all understanding (Philippians 4:6-8, Colossians
3:15).
Practice using these three witnesses to correctly test what you believe. It takes time and adjustments in your thinking for this to become a consistent practice. If you want to be a spiritual Christian and come to maturity, then you must make these changes. It is not enough to have knowledge of how to test conclusions properly. You must be a doer of the Word. If you hear the truth, but do not do it, you deceive yourself (James 1:22).
Purifying Your Faith
1 Peter 1:7 says, “That the genuineness of your faith, being much more precious than gold that perishes, though it is tested by fire, may be found to praise, honor, and glory at the revelation of Jesus Christ.” Allow the Holy Spirit to examine your faith to find out if it is contaminated or misdirected in any way.
The devil is an expert at influencing God’s children to misdirect their faith into ways that seem right. Once he has convinced you to release your faith into a lie, it is easy for him to hinder you from finding the truth or believing it when you do find it. When he succeeds in this endeavor, he has taken you captive (2 Timothy 2:26b).
When you hear a truth, you cannot believe it until you first quit believing the lie you already believe to be truth. Once you recognize the lie and choose to stop believing it, your faith returns to you and you can release it into the truth. This is how you rescue yourself from the snares of the devil.
/page(5)

2 Timothy 2:24-26 says, “And a servant of the Lord must not quarrel but be gentle to all, able to teach, patient, in humility correcting those who are in opposition, if God perhaps will grant them repentance, so that they may know the truth, and that they may come to their senses and escape the snare of the devil, having been taken captive by him to do his will.”
When you release your faith into a thought or idea, you give it the authority to be activated in your life. The author behind what you believe is either God or satan. It is so important to be careful about what you believe! Your faith can be a blessing or it can be a curse. It depends on what or who you release your faith into. Spend quality time in the presence of the Holy Spirit, asking Him to purify your faith by exposing the lies you believe to be truth. This will be time well spent!
Ask the Spirit to purify your faith
by exposing the lies you believe to be truth.
If you will take the time to move into the Spirit and seek Him for revelation without any preconceived judgments or opinions, He will bear witness to the truth. You do not have to understand truth to believe it. You must decide whether or not you will trust God and His Word. God is not the author of confusion (1 Corinthians 14:33), so if you are struggling with confusion and lack of understanding, this confirms satan is ministering lies to you. If you try to figure out the Word of God from your natural mind, satan will do everything in his power to deceive you and misdirect your faith.
The Anointing
Many Christians dream of being anointed by God and having the Holy Spirit abiding in them, directing and
/page(6)

manifesting through them. They want to see Him do miraculous works through them, but very few see this happen. Those who do see it do not see it very often.
I ask you, what are you most interested in? Are you focused on God’s anointing manifesting in you or are you more interested in the type of work He does through you? If the miraculous manifestations of the Spirit are more important to you than having a consistent anointing from God on your life, then your priorities are wrong.
In Luke 4:18-19, Jesus said, “The Spirit of the LORD is upon Me, Because He has anointed Me To preach the gospel to the poor; He has sent Me to heal the brokenhearted, To proclaim liberty to the captives And recovery of sight to the blind, To set at liberty those who are oppressed; To proclaim the acceptable year of the LORD.” The word anointed is defined as, “to smear or rub with oil, i.e. (by implication) to consecrate to an office or religious service” (Strong’s Greek #5548).
When I first began to walk with the Lord, I believed the anointing was the Spirit of the Lord upon someone. But Jesus said the Spirit of the Lord was upon Him because He was anointed. In Luke 4:18-19, He listed several things He was anointed to do. Jesus was anointed; that is, He was consecrated to fulfill His office and service on earth. Consecrate basically means, “to be set apart.” The different ministries listed in verses 18 and 19 are what God ordained and authorized Jesus to do. The Spirit of the Lord was upon Him to confirm the ministries He was authorized and enabled to do.
With God’s anointing comes everything you need to obey what He has authorized, but you must believe this truth for it to work. Whatever God commands you to do, He gives you the authorization for it to be done. In other words, everything you need, He provides; but this must be activated by faith. Then you must carry out His instructions in the Spirit as you give the glory (credit due) to Him for what He does through you.
/page(7)

I asked my Heavenly Father to show me how I could have His anointing in my life. He said, “If you trust Me and acknowledge Me in all your ways, then I will direct your steps (Proverbs 3:5-6). Once I have given you an instruction, I have authorized the grace, strength and abilities to obey. My anointing means I set you aside and authorize you to do this work. You should expect the Holy Spirit to be on you, enabling you to complete your assignment, regardless of how small it is in the eyes of man. It is not small in My eyes because this is the way I qualify you for greater things.”
From that day on, I sought God for directions in all areas of my life, large and small. My number one motive was to express my love to the Lord through my obedience (John 14:15). Obedience with a pure heart made the way for the Holy Spirit to manifest in my life in everyday situations as well as in challenging, life-changing circumstances. When this happened, my relationship with God deepened dramatically.
My advice to you is to keep it simple. Do not complicate what the Lord reveals to you. With revelation comes anointing. This includes conviction as well. When God speaks to you, He provides the anointing (authorization) with the word to do what He says.
Do not prejudge how you think the Holy Spirit should manifest to you and in you. Do not be discouraged if you do not sense a dramatic flow of His presence. He may choose to manifest in peace, joy, comfort, conviction or any number of other ways. Be content with how He chooses to manifest. As time goes on, you will experience His presence in many diverse ways. When this becomes a way of life for you (as it should), you will no longer be tempted by anything the world, your flesh or the enemy has to offer.
/page(8)

Foundation Stones Set in Place
Many of you who will read this book series, Foundations for Spiritual Maturity, are familiar with Servants of the Lord Ministries. You are acquainted with the teachings I have shared about walking with God, living in the Spirit, and developing a personal relationship with Jesus Christ. You know that having a personal relationship with God is the foundation for all of His provisions. However, there is a vast difference between getting to know God and being one who is spiritually mature. Developing the necessary foundation for spiritual maturity requires a much deeper work of God in your life.
The books in this series will include teachings that are beneficial to believers who are young in the Lord as well as those who have walked with God for years. These books will include key foundation stones of truth every Christian needs. (Foundation stones are basic, essential truths you believe and obey to the point that they become part of your spiritual groundwork.) If these foundation stones are not laid correctly and built on properly, spiritual maturity will not be produced.
Before we go on, I have the following questions for you:
* Have the necessary foundation stones of truth actually been set in place in your spirit; that is, has your character changed?
* Does the fruit of your life prove they are firmly set in place?
* Are you still inconsistent spiritually?
* Do you continue to struggle with your flesh,
especially when you are under pressure?
* Are you growing at the pace you know you
should be?
/page(9)

* Have you been faithful to build additional truths on top of the foundational truths you have been taught?
* Is Jesus consistently the literal, functional Lord of your life?
I ask you to stop at this moment and ask the Lord to show you the answers to these questions. You cannot deepen your spiritual foundation if God’s truths have never been properly placed in you. This work must be done between you and the Holy Spirit. I can teach you vast amounts of truth, but if you do not allow the Spirit to imbed those truths into your heart and life, they are of no value to you.
Before you go any farther, spend quality time before the Lord and ask Him to reveal the answers to the questions previously listed.
/page(10)

Reference Verses for Introduction
1 Corinthians 11:28-30
But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of the bread and drink of the cup. For he who eats and drinks in an unworthy manner eats and drinks judgment to himself, not discerning the Lord’s body. For this reason many are weak and sick among you, and many sleep.
2 Corinthians 5:17
Therefore, if anyone is in Christ, he is a new creation; old things have passed away; behold, all things have become new.
2 Timothy 2:15
Be diligent to present yourself approved to God, a worker who does not need to be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth.
Proverbs 14:12
There is a way that seems right to a man, But its end is the way of death.
2 Corinthians 11:14
And no wonder! For Satan himself transforms himself into an angel of light.
2 Corinthians 10:5
Casting down arguments and every high thing that exalts itself against the knowledge of God, bringing every thought into captivity to the obedience of Christ.
John 16:13
However, when He, the Spirit of truth, has come, He will guide you into all truth; for He will not speak on His own authority, but whatever He hears He will speak; and He will tell you things to come.
/page(11)

1 John 5:6b
...And it is the Spirit who bears witness, because the Spirit is truth.
1 Corinthians 2:14
But the natural man does not receive the things of the Spirit of God; for they are foolishness to him; nor can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned.
John 1:1
In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God.
2 Timothy 2:15
Be diligent to present yourself approved to God, a worker who does not need to be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth.
Philippians 4:6-8
Be anxious for nothing, but in everything by prayer and supplication, with thanksgiving, let your request be made known to God; and the peace of God, which surpasses all understanding, will guard your hearts and minds through Christ Jesus. Finally, brethren, whatever things are true, whatever things are noble, whatever things are just, whatever things are pure, whatever things are lovely, whatever things are of good report, if there is any virtue and if there is anything praiseworthy--meditate on these things.
Colossians 3:15
And let the peace of God rule in your hearts, to which also you were called in one body; and be thankful.
/page(12)

James 1:22
But be doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving yourselves.
1 Peter 1:7
That the genuineness of your faith, being much more precious than gold that perishes, though it is tested by fire, may be found to praise, honor, and glory at the revelation of Jesus Christ.
2 Timothy 2:26b
...having been taken captive by him to do his will.
2 Timothy 2:24-26
And a servant of the Lord must not quarrel but be gentle to all, able to teach, patient, in humility correcting those who are in opposition, if God perhaps will grant them repentance, so that they may know the truth, and that they may come to their senses and escape the snare of the devil, having been taken captive by him to do his will.
1 Corinthians 14:33
For God is not the author of confusion but of peace, as in all the churches of the saints.
Luke 4:18-19
The Spirit of the LORD is upon Me, Because He has anointed Me To preach the gospel to the poor; He has sent Me to heal the brokenhearted, To proclaim liberty to the captives And recovery of sight to the blind, To set at liberty those who are oppressed; To proclaim the acceptable year of the LORD.
Proverbs 3:5-6
Trust in the LORD with all your heart, And lean not on your own understanding; In all your ways acknowledge Him, And He shall direct your paths.
/page(13)

John 14:15
If you love Me, keep My commandments.
/page(14)

Chapter 1
Getting Started
God has authorized you to have an intimate relationship with Him and His Son. John 17:3 says, “And this is eternal life, that they may know You, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom You have sent.” The word know means, “to know in a great variety of applications (absolutely) and with many implications...allow, be aware (of), feel, (have) know(-ledge)...come to know, get knowledge of, perceive...” (Strong’s Greek #1097). One root definition refers to the intimacy between a husband and wife. In other words, it means to know deeply and personally.
You may be familiar with this verse, but stop for a moment and meditate on it. You were given the gift of eternal life so you could know your Heavenly Father, Jesus your Lord, and the Holy Spirit who is your Teacher and Comforter. God longs for an intimate relationship with you!
Everything in this book is about developing a deeply personal relationship with the Godhead. This relationship has nothing to do with works, ministry or maturity. Your primary focus should always be on having John 17:3 working in and through your life consistently.
It is time to go back to the first works. I strongly encourage you to read this book as if you are starting over. Even if you are a seasoned, mature minister, go back and make sure the first works are established in you. Remember that your trust in Jesus is directly proportional to the level you have fallen in love with Him and know Him. When you love Him unconditionally, you will acknowledge Him in all your
/page(15)

ways and obey Him because you trust Him with your whole heart.
You only trust God to the level that you love Him.
What to Expect
You should start to see obvious growth in your relationship with God as you process the truths in this book. Your ability to acknowledge God and obey Him should dramatically increase. Both your love for Him, and your trust in Him, should deepen. The process of old things passing away and all things becoming new should become a way of life as you continue to repent of the hindrances God reveals to you (2 Corinthians 5:17).
In the beginning, you should expect your basic communication, as far as direction from God, to come primarily through reading the Word. (A reminder: Be sure you are in the Spirit rather than the flesh when seeking direction from God.)
Allow the Spirit to show you what you should repent of. This includes sins of omission and commission: things you are not doing that you should be doing and things you are doing that you should not be doing. It is very important to process conviction properly through repentance, and repentance should take place in the presence of your Father. Do not be discouraged as you go through this. It is necessary and it is good for you!
The Proper Response to Conviction
Let me take a moment to restate what I said in the previous paragraph. Confession and repentance should take
/page(16)

place in your Father’s presence. Do not allow satan to have any part of this process. If thoughts come to you to suggest that you are a failure and you will never be able to walk with God because there is too much wrong with you, you must rebuke this lie from satan.
Your Father loves you and He convicts you because He does not want sin to separate you from fellowship with Him. Jesus’ death is the provision for your sins to be removed. His blood is available to cleanse you at the moment you confess your sins.
If you believe you cannot walk with God because there is too much wrong with you, you must rebuke this lie from satan.
1 John 1:9 says, “If we confess our sins, He is faithful and just to forgive us our sins and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.” When the Holy Spirit convicts (convinces) you that you are guilty of a particular sin, godly sorrow becomes evident (2 Corinthians 7:9-11). Its purpose is to lead you to repentance. When you are convicted, immediately repent of the sinful fruit that broke your fellowship with God and believe He will forgive you as He promised He would do. (Remember that trusting God means you believe He is trustworthy to do what He says He will do. This includes forgiveness!)
When you confess and repent, the godly sorrow you feel should immediately go away and you should move back into fellowship with God. His peace should return. Then you can ask the Holy Spirit to show you the reasons why you sinned and where the manifestation of the bad fruit came from. Because you are in His presence, you should be able to hear His instructions.
Meditate on each truth the Holy Spirit reveals to you. Ask Him to show you how to break the habit of the sins He
/page(17)

exposes. Ask Him to show you directly or through the Word what is correct instead of what you were doing wrong. The process of moving from the carnal nature to Christ’s nature through repentance will be a continual process, and conviction will be more prevalent in the beginning. The more you repent, the more Christ-like you will become!
Before I go on, let me remind you that you must approach conviction and repentance in the Spirit. Godly sorrow is ordained by God to lead you to repentance (2 Corinthians 7:10). His goal is to remove any and every hindrance that keeps you from enjoying consistent fellowship with Him. His motive is always love! He convicts you because He loves you, and with conviction, He has made the provision for the sin and godly sorrow to be removed. He has promised to forgive you when you repent. However, if you do not believe this truth from your heart, you will continue to struggle with condemnation and will have trouble becoming free in your spirit after you have been convicted.
If you repent but godly sorrow remains, it is likely you do not believe you are forgiven. Matthew 9:29b says, “...According to your faith let it be to you.” Spiritual principles are always activated by faith, so if you believe you are forgiven, you are. However, if you believe you are not forgiven, you will not be. If you do not move back into God’s presence as soon as you repent, this is confirmation that you are not trusting God and His Word with your whole heart. (I suggest that you stop a moment and ask the Lord if this has been a recurring problem in your spiritual life.)
When I first began to walk with the Lord many years ago, I learned to be a fast repenter. When I was convicted, I immediately asked for forgiveness so I could move back into God’s presence. I chose to trust God and believe that His Word was truth. I have not wavered in this commitment for many years, and I am rarely out of God’s presence because I am quick to confess any sin God exposes.
/page(18)

I encourage you to look at this process from God’s perspective. Have the same goal He does, which is for you to stay in fellowship with Him. Be quick to trust Him and obey, especially when it comes to conviction. Become a fast repenter!
The Importance of Conviction
It is important to understand why conviction is paramount in the beginning. God is convicting you about sins that move you out of the Spirit. His goal is to do whatever is necessary to bring you closer to Him. He wants you to remain in the Spirit and be in a safe environment where you will grow up spiritually.
God says in Hebrews 12:5b-7 that He does this for us because He loves us. “...‘My son, do not despise the chastening of the LORD, Nor be discouraged when you are rebuked by Him; For whom the LORD loves He chastens, And scourges every son whom He receives.’ If you endure chastening, God deals with you as with sons; for what son is there whom a father does not chasten?” This work should encourage you because it confirms you are God’s child. Hebrews 12:8 says, “But if you are without chastening, of which all have become partakers, then you are illegitimate and not sons.” You should embrace the work of conviction and repentance. Embracing conviction will produce the greatest amount of fruit in the shortest amount of time.
Embracing conviction will produce the greatest amount of fruit
in the shortest amount of time.
Each time you are convicted, a hindrance to your spiritual walk and maturity has been identified. Each one is a reason why you do not stay in the Spirit consistently.
/page(19)

Conviction is an alarm to warn you that it is time to deal with a specific issue. Instead of viewing this as a negative experience from a fleshly point of view, look at it from God’s perspective. He convicts you so you can repent and remove another sin that hinders you from walking closely with Him. He does this because He loves you so much and does not want anything to separate you from fellowship with Him.
Conviction is a blessing! Yes, it is uncomfortable but what wonderful eternal fruit it produces! If you think about it, you will realize the negative feeling of conviction is merely your flesh reacting because it does not want to die.
Colossians 3:5 says, “Therefore put to death your members which are on the earth: fornication, uncleanness, passion, evil desire, and covetousness, which is idolatry.” You may think you are not guilty of such blatant sins, but I would remind you that loving anyone or anything more than you love Jesus Christ is idolatry. Remember that God sees the fullness of what is in your heart and mind even if it does not manifest in outward behavior. Let the Holy Spirit examine your thoughts and the desires of your heart.
Allow God to have access to every area of your life. Do not set boundaries on His work in you. When it does not make sense to your natural mind, you must choose to trust Him. Remember that trusting God is a choice, not an emotion. Proverbs 3:5-6 says, “Trust in the LORD with all your heart, And lean not on your own understanding; In all your ways acknowledge Him, And He shall direct your paths.”
God is making decisions for your life that will cause you to become a spiritual being and reach maturity. He wants you to fully enjoy your spiritual heritage. It is important that you do not waste time trying to understand God’s decisions from your human perspective. Simply choose to trust and obey Him. When godly fruit is produced, you will see the results of His work.
Trusting God is a choice, not an emotion.
/page(20)

A Personal Testimony
When I first began to know the Lord, I made the decision to trust Him completely with every area of my life. I decided to trust God 100% for an entire year. I knew that in that amount of time I could compare the fruit of Him being Lord to the fruit of when I had been lord. When I saw the good fruit His Lordship produced (long before the year ended), I gave Him my complete trust forever.
At first, it seemed everything God said convicted me. I did not understand it at the time but now I do. The most important thing to God was to close the doors in my life where satan could take me captive at his will (2 Timothy 2:26). These areas of sin had to be dealt with so I could have the communion and fellowship with God that I desired.
In the beginning, I did not understand how important the purifying of my faith and obedience were. God convicted me and made choices for my life without any explanation. It did not seem fair at the time. When I sought Him for explanations, His response was, “Do you love Me?” I replied that I did. He would then say, “Keep My commandments.”
Jesus gave us the standard for expressing love to Him in John 14:15. “If you love Me, keep My commandments.” From that time on I decided to trust Him and obey Him for one simple reason: to show Him I loved Him. Everything became much easier after I made that decision. My love grew and my faith was purified. This accelerated everything else.
Do not get discouraged when God begins to expose multiple sins in your life! Before God can build the eternal things He wants in your life, He must first tear down the carnal, temporal things you have built. For a short season, it may look like you are going the wrong direction. Once the “old” is mostly cleared away in different areas of your life, the “new” will come very quickly and it will become much easier.
Many of God’s children never deal with His Lordship for the same reason many stopped following Jesus when He was
/page(21)

on the earth. Jesus’ preaching did not make sense to their carnal minds, and they did not want to follow Him because it seemed too hard (John 6:60-66). But the disciples chose to trust and obey Him and they became the heroes of faith. So I ask you: What will you do?
Life Changing Scriptures
Two scriptures helped me tremendously when I first began to develop my personal relationship with God. Remember that my only goal was to know the Lord. I was not seeking for blessings, ministry or any other thing. I simply wanted to know God in a deeply intimate way. I wanted to hear His voice and I looked for ways to obey Him to show Him I loved Him.
Psalm 46:10a is a simple instruction; if you obey it, it will change your life. “Be still, and know that I am God...” Some of the words that define still are, “...abate, cease...(be) slack, stay, be still...” (Strong’s Hebrew #7503). You must learn to cease from your own labors and stay quiet before your Father. The word know includes the following, “to know (properly, to ascertain by seeing); used in a variety of senses...including observation, care, recognition...acknowledge, acquainted with...” (Strong’s Hebrew #3045). God wants you to personally experience an intimate relationship with Him.
James 1:19 says, “So then, my beloved brethren, let every man be swift to hear, slow to speak, slow to wrath.” If you want to know the Lord intimately, you must learn to listen attentively and be quiet! Many of your spiritual struggles will stop if you simply obey these instructions. Be eager to hear what the Lord says, and stop telling Him your preferences and opinions.
Listen attentively to the Lord and be quiet!
/page(22)

If you are honest, you will have to admit you have spent a portion of your spiritual life giving God instructions on what you would like Him to do or what you think He should do. He has been in control for eternity and He does not need your advice! When you begin to ask Him for directions then wait quietly as He speaks, you will find you can hear Him more clearly than you ever have. You will find that His peace and joy begin to flow over you in a new and deeper way.
The end of James 1:19 says, “...be...slow to wrath.” If you have struggled with Jesus’ Lordship for much of your Christian life, it is possible you are angry with God because of choices He has made or situations He has allowed in your life. This may be hard for you to admit, but I ask you to stop right now and ask Him this question: “Do I have buried anger and judgments against You for things that have happened in the past?” The answer may surprise you.
If you find you have anger or judgments against God, you must confess this sin before you go any farther. Spend time in God’s presence seeking answers in this area. Ask the Lord to forgive you for each sin you have committed against Him. Do not let satan minister condemnation to you as you confess. Your Father loves you and wants to forgive every sin you have committed against Him. (Chapter 7 explains how to repent in detail.)
Whatever you believe that questions your Father’s love, faithfulness, integrity or holiness is a lie. You may think you have evidence proving God is wrong, but if all of the evidence is presented, you will always be the one who is wrong. I make this statement based on what the Word of God says and my personal experiences.
Ways That Seem Right
James 1:22 says, “But be doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving yourselves.” If you desire to know
/page(23)

God and walk with Him, satan will not be able to seduce you with obvious evil. He has to use ways that seem right to you. Proverbs 14:12 and 16:25 say, “There is a way that seems right to a man, But its end is the way of death.” Remember: It is when you believe you are right but are actually wrong that you are deceived. Do not waste your time looking at areas that are obviously wrong. These areas indicate that you are in rebellion and should be easily recognized. They should be dealt with immediately through repentance.
The areas you believe are right cause the most trouble.
If you are seeking a relationship with God but it is not working, your problem is that you are already deceived. You have to face this truth! You must constantly examine the fruit in your life to see how it compares to God’s Word and His personal revelation in your life.
If your life does not reflect what God says, something is wrong! Believe me, it is not God’s fault if you are not where you should be spiritually. This is why I will continue to encourage you to examine each fundamental truth presented in this book and ask the Holy Spirit to show you why it is not in place in your life. You will never change if you continue to make excuses.
The Danger of Spiritualized Flesh
On every critical point the Holy Spirit reveals to you, simply ask Him if you are, or are not, obeying that particular revelation. If you are not, stop making excuses. Ask the Spirit to show you why you do not or cannot obey. There are no excuses, only reasons. Reasons can be identified by the Spirit and can and should be eliminated through repentance. Let me remind you once again: Everything you get convicted about is another reason why your spiritual life is not working.
Remember: Every part of this work must be done in the Spirit, not in your spiritualized flesh. In spiritualized flesh,
/page(24)

you develop good ideas from your natural, “religious” mind (from your lordship) rather than asking God what He wants you to do. If God commands you to do something, it can be done. If you cannot do what God says, the Spirit as your Teacher is eager to show you what hindrances are keeping you from obeying. He longs for you to have intimate fellowship with the Godhead. You can trust Him!
Do not try to process truth through your spiritualized flesh. It will never work!
There may be legitimate reasons why you cannot obey a particular command God has given you. You need to seek the Holy Spirit for revelation about why you cannot obey. You may have a problem with trusting God or your love may not be as pure as it should be. The Spirit will show you every reason why you are struggling and how to overcome each reason.
It is possible you cannot obey a particular commandment because it is not required at your current level of maturity. Do not make any assumptions! The father of lies (satan) loves to bring condemnation as an angel of light (John 8:44c, 2 Corinthians 11:14). He will tell you that you are a failure when it may be that God is not telling you to do a particular thing. Ask the Holy Spirit to show you exactly what you need to do.
Let me say this one more time: Do not try to process truth in your spiritualized flesh. Operating in the flesh always keeps a door open to satan. Pray a covering over yourself as you seek God about these matters. Submit yourself to God and resist the devil! He will flee from you (James 4:7).
If you continue to process truth in your spiritualized flesh, you will continue to be deceived. It is imperative that you stop doing this! If you continue to struggle with your walk and proclaim, “I have done everything I know to do and it still is not working,” then you must face the fact that you are deceived.
/page(25)

The only way to stop deception is to humble yourself before the Lord and confess your sin. When you have repented and are confident you are in the Lord’s presence, ask Him to show you the ways in which you operate in deception. Your Lord longs for you to be close to Him and be free from the deceptions of the enemy. Repent of every problem He exposes. Trust Him to show you how to be free from the lies you have believed.
I have said it before and I will say it again. Keep it simple! It is time to work on the foundation of your personal relationship with Jesus Christ. As you willingly submit yourself to the Lord who loves you, He will show you every hindrance that is keeping you from having the relationship with Him that you desire and the spiritual maturity you have been longing for.
God’s Laws and Exceptions
God’s kingdom is a kingdom of order. He created the laws of His kingdom. Many blessings and benefits result when we obey Him. There are also penalties and losses for disobeying His commands. Only the one who makes and enforces the laws can change or make an exception to them.
If God chooses to change one of His laws then whatever the law was before is no longer binding. For example, His laws changed from the Old Covenant to the New Covenant. In the Old Covenant, sacrifices were required to cover sin and there were numerous laws that had to be followed. In the New Covenant, Jesus fulfilled the Law. We are now made righteous through faith in Him instead of obeying the laws of the Old Testament (Hebrews 8:7-13).
If God chooses to make an exception to one of His laws, for whatever reason, it does not change the law. No person has the authority to change or make exception to any of God’s laws. When we break God’s laws, we sin. The Bible
/page(26)

explains the penalty for breaking God’s law, and the exception to the penalty, in Romans 6:23. “For the wages of sin is death (the penalty of the law), but the gift of God is eternal life in Christ Jesus our Lord (the exception to the penalty of the law).” 1 John 1:9 says, “If we confess our sins, He is faithful and just to forgive us our sins and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.” When we confess, God makes an exception to the law and does not penalize us for our sins. This is grace, God’s unmerited (undeserved) favor.
Gifts with Conditions
As believers, we have been given a great heritage by the grace of God. There are many gifts and opportunities available to us to become vessels of honor in our Father’s house (2 Timothy 2:21). Many of God’s gifts to us have conditions, and many opportunities require that we qualify for them.
I believe the greatest gift God gave us was the gift of eternal life (John 17:3) and the new birth. The privilege to know the Father, Jesus Christ, and the Holy Spirit in an intimate way is available to every Christian, but there are conditions we must meet to enjoy this gift. Jesus must become your first love and the Lord of your life for this gift to manifest as it should.
John 14:15 and John 14:21-23 explain the conditions you must meet to enjoy a deeply personal relationship with your God. Verse 15 says, “If you love Me, keep My commandments.” Verses 21-23 say, “ ‘He who has My commandments and keeps them, it is he who loves Me. And he who loves Me will be loved by My Father, and I will love him and manifest Myself to him.’ Judas (not Iscariot) said to Him, ‘Lord, how is it that You will manifest Yourself to us, and not to the world?’ Jesus answered and said to him, ‘If anyone loves Me, he will keep My word; and My Father will
/page(27)

love him, and We will come to him and make Our home with him.’ ”
You cannot get to know God if you do not spend quality time in His presence. Fellowship with Him will be greatly hindered if you do not obey Him from a loving heart. As you obey and trust Him, your relationship with Him will deepen. As it does, God will give you multiple opportunities to serve Him.
Matthew 22:14 says, “For many are called, but few are chosen.” When God calls you, which means He gives you the invitation to serve Him, the Holy Spirit is released to teach and prepare you. When you qualify through obedience, you are then chosen, which means you are accepted. Once you are accepted, God begins to train you in His school, and He anoints (authorizes) you to function in the work He chooses.
If you are faithful, then He will give you more opportunities to obey. Remember: To whom much is given, more is required (Luke 12:48b). God’s ultimate goal is for you to qualify to rule and reign with Him in His kingdom for eternity. All of these opportunities are given to you by grace through faith, and it is not based on any qualities you possess.
/page(28)

Assignment
Ask the Lord to answer the following questions:
* Do I enjoy the gift of eternal life in a limited way?
* Do I process conviction in the Spirit or in the flesh?
* Do I consider conviction to be a blessing?
* Do I obey Proverbs 3:5-6?
* Do I operate in spiritualized flesh?
Spend time meditating on Psalm 46:10a and James 1:19. Ask the Lord to show you if you obey these scriptures; and if so, to what level.
/page(29)

Reference Verses for Chapter 1
John 17:3
And this is eternal life, that they may know You, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom You have sent.
2 Corinthians 5:17
Therefore, if anyone is in Christ, he is a new creation; old things have passed away; behold, all things have become new.
1 John 1:9
If we confess our sins, He is faithful and just to forgive us our sins and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.
2 Corinthians 7:9-11
Now I rejoice, not that you were made sorry, but that your sorrow led to repentance. For you were made sorry in a godly manner, that you might suffer loss from us in nothing. For godly sorrow produces repentance leading to salvation, not to be regretted; but the sorrow of the world produces death. For observe this very thing, that you sorrowed in a godly manner: What diligence it produced in you, what clearing of yourselves, what indignation, what fear, what vehement desire, what zeal, what vindication! In all things you proved yourselves to be clear in this matter.
Matthew 9:29b
...According to your faith let it be to you.
Hebrews 12:5b-7
“...My son, do not despise the chastening of the LORD, Nor be discouraged when you are rebuked by Him; For whom the LORD loves He chastens, And scourges every son whom He receives.” If you endure chastening, God deals with you as with sons; for what son is there whom a father does not chasten?
/page(30)

Hebrews 12:8
But if you are without chastening, of which all have become partakers, then you are illegitimate and not sons.
Colossians 3:5
Therefore put to death your members which are on the earth: fornication, uncleanness, passion, evil desire, and covetousness, which is idolatry.
Proverbs 3:5-6
Trust in the LORD with all your heart, And lean not on your own understanding; In all your ways acknowledge Him, And He shall direct your paths.
2 Timothy 2:26
And that they may come to their senses and escape the snare of the devil, having been taken captive by him to do his will.
John 14:15
If you love Me, keep My commandments.
John 6:60-66
Therefore many of His disciples, when they heard this, said, “This is a hard saying; who can understand it?” When Jesus knew in Himself that His disciples complained about this, He said to them, “Does this offend you? What then if you should see the Son of Man ascend where He was before? It is the Spirit who gives life; the flesh profits nothing. The words that I speak to you are spirit, and they are life. But there are some of you who do not believe.” For Jesus knew from the beginning who they were who did not believe, and who would betray Him. And He said, “Therefore I have said to you that no one can come to Me unless it has been granted to him by My Father.” From that time many of His disciples went back and walked with Him no more.
/page(31)

Psalm 46:10a
Be still, and know that I am God...
James 1:19
So then, my beloved brethren, let every man be swift to hear, slow to speak, slow to wrath.
James 1:22
But be doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving yourselves.
Proverbs 14:12 and Proverbs 16:25
There is a way that seems right to a man, But its end is the way of death.
John 8:44c
...there is no truth in him. When he speaks a lie, he speaks from his own resources, for he is a liar and the father of it.
2 Corinthians 11:14
And no wonder! For Satan himself transforms himself into an angel of light.
James 4:7
Therefore submit to God. Resist the devil and he will flee from you.
Hebrews 8:7-13
For if that first covenant had been faultless, then no place would have been sought for a second. Because finding fault with them, He says: “Behold the days are coming, says the LORD, when I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel and with the house of Judah--not according to the covenant that I made with their fathers in the day when I took them by the hand to lead them out of the land of Egypt; because they did not continue in My covenant, and I
/page(32)

disregarded them, says the LORD. For this is the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel after those days, says the LORD: I will put My laws in their mind and write them on their hearts; and I will be their God, and they shall be My people. None of them shall teach his neighbor, and none his brother, saying, ‘Know the LORD,’ for all shall know Me, from the least of them to the greatest of them, For I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and their sins and their lawless deeds I will remember no more.” In that He says, “A new covenant,” He has made the first obsolete. Now what is becoming obsolete and growing old is ready to vanish away.
Romans 6:23
For the wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life in Christ Jesus our Lord.
2 Timothy 2:21
Therefore if anyone cleanses himself from the latter, he will be a vessel for honor, sanctified and useful for the Master, prepared for every good work.
John 17:3
And this is eternal life, that they may know You, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom You have sent.
John 14:15
If you love Me, keep My commandments.
John 14:21-23
“He who has My commandments and keeps them, it is he who loves Me. And He who loves Me will be loved by My Father, and I will love him and manifest Myself to him.” Judas (not Iscariot) said to Him, “Lord, how is it that You will manifest Yourself to us, and not to the world?” Jesus answered and said to him, “If anyone loves Me, he will keep My word; and
/page(33)

My Father will love him, and We will come to him and make Our home with him.”
Matthew 22:14
For many are called, but few are chosen.
Luke12:48b
...For everyone to whom much is given, from him much will be required; and to whom much has been committed, of him they will ask the more.
/page(34)

Chapter 2
Practical Instructions
As you go through each section in this book, highlight or underline anything the Spirit quickens to you. Remember to process each truth that is divinely revealed to you in the Spirit, especially if you are convicted. If you process truth in the Spirit (repent of what is contrary to the truth and embrace the truth by faith), peace and revelation will flow. You should hear directions about what to do, what not to do, and any hindrances that are in your way. Remember to keep it simple!
One important thing to remember is to guard against ways that seem right. The devil will try to distract you with “good ideas” to fix your problems, but he can only do this if you are lord. Stay in the Spirit and let your Teacher do the work! As soon as you try to fix your spiritual problems by yourself, you have become lord. When you are lord, you are unable to hear the Spirit’s instructions because you are in the flesh, where satan always has access. Do not try to help God do His work in you. Keep your heart and thoughts focused on Him, and He will add all that is needed.
It is important to slow down as you go back to deal with your foundation. I cannot stress how important this is! Be sure the Spirit is directing each step. When you know the Spirit has started working on a particular area, it is crucial to stay focused on Him to complete the work. Be sure the Spirit, not you, is initiating any change of direction.
Once again, do not complicate things! Ask the Spirit to show you how to repent of each hindrance. The Holy Spirit is
/page(35)

your Teacher, and He wants you to enjoy fellowship with the Father and Jesus more than you do. He has the answers!
The Holy Spirit desires that you enjoy fellowship with the Father and Jesus more than you do.
I am going to say this again because it is absolutely crucial for this process to work properly: Do not try to do this work in your spiritualized flesh. Do not decide what you need to fix! Instead, ask the Lord what you need to do. It is a work of the Spirit and He knows why your foundation has not been laid properly. Trust God to do this work!
No Excuses!
If your relationship with God is not working, either God is the problem or you are the problem. God is not the problem, so that only leaves you. The problem I had in the early days of walking with the Lord was that I did not know why I was the problem, but I came to the conclusion that if the relationship was not working, there was no excuse for it.
If God has authorized you to obey a command or receive a provision from Him, then He has also authorized everything needed to get it done. It is your responsibility to receive what He has authorized and to use it in a lawful way. Then you can do what He said to do or receive what He said to receive.
If your relationship with God is not what it should be, there are no excuses, only reasons why it is not working. Reasons can be identified and removed until there are no more reasons. Many of you get stuck at this point. You come before the Lord and ask Him to show you the reasons why your relationship with Him is not working. Many of you have told me you do not get an answer so you give up.
/page(36)

In this series we are looking at the overall goal of pressing toward spiritual maturity. We will deal with many reasons why you are not where you should be spiritually. Instead of trying to hear detailed dialogue about all of the reasons (which you may be unable to hear), this book will give you a wide range of reasons why you are not mature. Every time the Spirit convicts you while reading this book, you have found another reason why you are not spiritually mature and why your relationship with God is inconsistent.
Instructions
As soon as the Spirit identifies an area you need to repent of, stop right then and ask the Lord to forgive you. Confession of your sin is essential in order to stay in God’s presence, but repentance to the root level is a much deeper work. My advice is to get a notebook and a pen. Write down what the Spirit convicts you about. Give each conviction or revelation an entire page and note the date the Spirit shows you an area that needs work.
Remember: God authorizes you to be free from everything the Spirit convicts you about. In other words, you are anointed to deal with each issue He reveals. The Spirit will move on you and instruct you about how to process each conviction until it is no longer a problem for you.
As you go through the book and make a note for each thing you are convicted about, do not get discouraged. Be encouraged! Every one of those reasons you remove through repentance will bring you closer to the goal God has set for you. God already knows every detail about what He is exposing before you ever recognize it, and He still loves you! He also knows about every sin He has not yet revealed, and none of those sins cause His love for you to waver.
Do not try to fix what your Teacher shows you in spiritualized flesh, and do not open the door to
/page(37)

condemnation by feeling sorry for yourself. In the beginning, you are simply repenting of each conviction in general and making a note of what you need to process spiritually. Then in your quiet times, be sure you are in the Spirit and bring your notes before the Lord. Go through each page, asking the Spirit if there is revelation on any topic He wants to show you. As you feel a flow of peace, go page by page and listen to the Spirit as your Teacher. You only have to work on the area the Holy Spirit chooses. All other areas are covered by grace until it is time to deal with them.
You only have to work on the area the Holy Spirit chooses.
There will always be something in your notebook He wants to reveal to you. If He shows you something on a topic, write it on a page with the date He shows it to you. Whether it requires you to stop doing something or begin doing something, start practicing what your Teacher says. Once again, remember to keep it simple! As long as you present yourself to the Teacher with an open heart that embraces all of God’s standards, your Teacher will only require you to do whatever He specifies.
All of the items on the other pages in your notebook are covered by grace and do not separate you from fellowship with the Lord. When grace covers an issue, it is not counted against you at the present time, but it is still important. If you are faithful and do not procrastinate, God will deal with each sin in His timing. You can always trust Him to be faithful in the work He does in you.
This does not make sense to the natural mind, but it is the truth. It is truth because God sees the fullness of your decision to repent and your faithfulness to do whatever He shows you. (Chapter 11 gives details about God seeing in fullness.)
Additional conviction and learning how to walk out the fruits of your repentance will be listed on the pages as God
/page(38)

gives deeper revelation about each particular sin. This will cause you to break the habit and go to the root problem which is always taking over lordship. It is important to spend time seeking the Lord about how and why you take over lordship in each area.
For example, suppose you have a habit of getting angry. Ask the Lord to show you all of the situations that cause you to get angry. Ask Him if there is a common reason for your anger. Perhaps you only get angry at family members or in certain pressure situations. Then ask the Lord to show you why you get angry in those instances. Study the Word to see what God says about anger and what you should do instead of getting angry. You may find that your anger is a fruit of making judgments, which you are commanded not to do in Matthew 7:1. “Judge not, that you be not judged.”
The more you explore an area, the more the Lord can show you how to shut every door to the sin and go down to the root reasons why it is a habitual sin for you. The taproot is always taking over lordship, but sometimes it takes time to work your way down the path from the fruit to the root. (The picture of the trees in My Sheep Hear My Voice illustrates the path from fruit to root level. It is important to note that the “trunk” of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, that is, your lordship, is always selfishness.) The Lord has all of the answers you need as He exposes your sin, and He will set you free as you confess and repent. Let Him do the work to change your heart!
As you read the Bible, hear a sermon or receive direct revelation, add a new page to your notebook every time you are convicted. Then work through each area as the Lord directs. Some will be faster and easier than others.
When a problem area has been completely repented of and the Lord says it is no longer a problem, I suggest you move the page to the back of your notebook in a separate section so you can check it from time to time. It is always a good idea to recheck areas where you have gained victory to be sure you
/page(39)

are maintaining your repentance. In other words, you continue to practice what God has shown you and you no longer have the habit of the sin. Having this section will encourage you as you see progress being made.
If satan has had access to an area for years, he will try to re-establish it. You must be vigilant. It helps to have dates on everything God shows you so you can look back and see if you are procrastinating. If you are, repent and bring the problem to the Teacher. If you find you are behind in multiple areas and realize you have put them off for a long time, you may need a page entitled “Procrastination.” Procrastination will greatly hinder your spiritual walk.
The more you expand your notebook and the more quality time you spend with the Spirit teaching and correcting you, the faster you will grow. When you embrace His work in you, you will not waste time doing things that seem right but do not produce any fruit.
Conviction is a blessing and you need to see it that way. Without it, you are not considered to be a son or daughter. Hebrews 12:6-8 says, “ ‘For whom the LORD loves He chastens, And scourges every son whom He receives.’ If you endure chastening, God deals with you as with sons; for what son is there whom a father does not chasten? But if you are without chastening, of which all have become partakers, then you are illegitimate and not sons.”
If there is an area that has been a problem for a long time, you can date the issue “a long time ago” and start where you are. It is crucial to admit where you are, even if you are much farther behind than where you thought you were. There is great freedom in accepting that you are levels behind where you believed yourself to be because God judges your faithfulness based on where you truly are. If you have struggled a lot, it is very likely you are trying to walk in a level beyond where you actually are.
/page(40)

Make No Assumptions
You may be functioning in ministry and be considered faithful by those around you, but how does God see you in terms of your personal spiritual maturity? He knows every detail about your spiritual growth and your level of development. It is important that you do not make any assumptions at this point.
Simply ask the Lord where you are spiritually. He may say you are a toddler or preschooler in certain areas but a fairly functional, mature child in another area. He may say you are in early levels of school when you think you are in more advanced training. He may say you function well as a soldier in some areas but are still in early levels of training in others.
It is important to abstain from comparing yourself to other believers around you. God’s standard is for you to reach toward the mark of the high calling He has set for you personally. Philippians 3:14 says, “I press toward the goal for the prize of the upward call of God in Christ Jesus.” It does not matter what someone else’s level is. You will give an account for yourself alone.
Ask the Lord if He considers you to be faithful and at what level. There is great freedom in knowing where you are! If you are behind, God’s mercy will cleanse you as you repent, and His grace will take you where you need to go.
How to Use Your Notebook
As you process the instructions in this book, it is important to keep a record of what the Holy Spirit shows you. This helps you identify what you need to repent of and work on, as well as keeps you focused on what the Lord is doing in your life. Remember that it is important to pray a spiritual covering over your time before the Lord. The devil does not
/page(41)

want you to have victory over him, and he will try to interfere with this process in any way he can.
When the Holy Spirit reveals an issue He wants to address (sin, lies you believe, new revelation, and so on), the first thing you need to do is make a note of what He says and the date He says it. Then ask the Spirit to show you any revelation you need in that particular area. Go through this process slowly! One revelation may have multiple subcategories that do not need their own page. You may find many revelations about one particular subject.
If you are unable to get additional revelation, ask the Holy Spirit to show you why you cannot hear any details. It may be that it is not the correct time to work on that area, but it may also be because satan is trying to distract you with confusion, misdirection and ways that seem right.
If the Lord is saying to work on the area and you are not hearing instructions, identify your thoughts at that moment. Are you still enjoying the peace of God or do you feel frustrated and upset? What are you thinking and feeling?
If the peace of God remains, simply wait for the Spirit to speak to you and write down what He says. If you are struggling in any way, write down your thoughts. These negative thoughts indicate that satan is speaking to you. Do not get discouraged at this point! Simply move back into the Spirit through repentance and make sure the peace is flowing. Write down all of the thoughts and negative feelings you had. Each one is another hindrance that needs to be dealt with through repentance.
The devil does not want you to know the truth and he will distract you with negative thoughts. You must identify his words and rebuke them. Even if satan is bringing confusion and doubt, you are learning how to identify his voice, which is a great blessing. This is another opportunity to destroy his work in your life.
If the Holy Spirit has identified an area that needs work, simply ask a “yes” or “no” question. Ask if He wants to show
/page(42)

you something at that moment. If you do not hear a “yes,” ask Him if you should move to another area; and if so, which area it is. Do not try to force the issue because this opens the door for satan to minister ways that seem right to you.
If the Spirit does flow, once again, identify your thoughts and feelings and write them down. Ask Him to show you excuses you have used or lies you have believed about the topic. Monitor the peace of God in your heart. When the Spirit teaches, the peace of God will flow freely. If it does not flow, something is wrong and satan has some kind of access. Again, examine each thought and feeling. Be sure you remain in the Spirit the entire time you are working on items in your notebook.
I always think of satan as God’s sheepdog. When he bites at you with lies, condemnation, ways that seem right and negative thoughts and emotions, run back to your Shepherd! What satan intends for evil, God will use for your good. When the devil's lies and deceptions are exposed, and you move down the path from the fruit of your sin to the root, his works in your life will be destroyed.
The fruit of all sin comes from the root of taking over lordship from Jesus Christ. Satan has a myriad of ways to deceive you in this area. Every time another sin or lie is exposed, you become more free. There are other roots attached to the taproot, but the entire root system will be destroyed when you fully submit to the Lordship of Jesus Christ. Creating and going through your notebook in the Spirit will do this work.
Be encouraged! See conviction as the blessing it is. Letting the Spirit examine every area of your life will set you free. You will begin to enjoy a relationship with God you have never had before. Think of this as the Spirit of God breaking every chain that holds you captive to your flesh and the devil. What an exciting concept!
Remember: Even though this may sound overwhelming, you only have to deal with what the Holy
/page(43)

Spirit identifies. Everything else is covered by grace. Do not get overloaded with all of the information you receive. It is a great benefit to you to know every detail of how you have been wrong so you can repent and be set free. Every revelation is a blessing! Every session you have with the Holy Spirit will give you the opportunity to correct an area and become more like Christ. This is the most effective use of your time as you seek to know the Lord better.
Maintaining Your Notebook
When you overcome in an area and God says you are faithful, you can move the page to the back of your notebook. This does not mean He will not work on the subject again at a deeper level. Think of the difference between mathematics in first grade versus calculus in college. It is the same topic but much harder material.
Do not get under condemnation and assume you are doing something wrong if you go back to a topic you have not dealt with for a while. You may be in a higher grade in some areas, but lower in others. If God deals with an issue again, it does not mean you are failing. Always ask your Teacher how you are doing instead of judging yourself.
Maintaining this notebook will change your life dramatically. Commit yourself to learning by the Holy Spirit alone. One wonderful thing about the Spirit is that He can work on an area for a while, and then have recess. He is the Teacher. If He is not teaching or correcting at the moment, relax and rest in His presence. He covers what He is not dealing with. You are in His school.
It is imperative that you stay in the Spirit and remain in God’s school rather than struggle in spiritualized flesh. As I said before, when the Lord confirms you have successfully dealt with an issue, move the page to the back of your notebook. This will be your “maintenance file” and it will
/page(44)

include areas where you have attained victory but still need to monitor. Items in this part of your notebook may be worked on by the Lord again when He wants to deepen and expand the topics so you can grow more.
Remember: If your Teacher addresses an issue again, this does not necessarily mean you have failed. It may mean it is time for advancement! Be sure you ask the Spirit why an issue is being addressed again and do not open the door for satan to lie to you about failing.
One final word before we move on: I encourage you to use a pen and paper to create your notebook instead of a computer. This is what I did over forty years ago and I have never wavered in my commitment to the Lordship of Jesus Christ.
The Lord told me that technology can lead to distractions. Trust me on this! I know the way I did it works because of the fruit that is evident in my life. It is too easy to let your mind get distracted when you use a computer and subconsciously you may hold on to control. It is time to let go of the control once and for all!
Note: Using technology to look up scriptures and Strong’s definitions may help you with your research. However, be sure to ask the Lord about this. He may require you to use reference books because this is necessary to help you slow down and hear His voice more clearly. The key is to take your time and not rush the process.
/page(45)

Assignment
Ask the Lord to show you the reasons why your spiritual life is not as it should be. Write in your notebook any excuses you have made for why you are behind spiritually. Write down any revelation He shows you. As He exposes areas of sin, be quick to confess and repent. As you process what He shows you, be careful not to move into the flesh and condemnation. All repentance should take place in the presence of your Father!
/page(46)

Reference Verses for Chapter 2
Matthew 7:1
Judge not, that you be not judged.
Hebrews 12:6-8
“For whom the LORD loves He chastens, And scourges every son whom He receives.” If you endure chastening, God deals with you as with sons; for what son is there whom a father does not chasten? But if you are without chastening, of which all have become partakers, then you are illegitimate and not sons.
Philippians 3:14
I press toward the goal for the prize of the upward call of God in Christ Jesus.
/page(47)

Chapter 3
Laying the Foundation
I can teach you how to have ears to hear what God says to you. I can encourage you to develop a relationship with your Father and communicate with Him consistently so He can bring you to maturity. But the process that puts this in place is between you and God, by the Holy Spirit. The work of actually placing foundational truths into your spirit has nothing to do with me. It is between you and God.
1 Corinthians 3:10-11 says, “According to the grace of God which was given to me, as a wise master builder I have laid the foundation, and another builds on it. But let each one take heed how he builds on it. For no other foundation can anyone lay than that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ.”
My job is to teach foundation to you. I am instructed by God to warn you from time to time when you get off-track in your spiritual walk. I am called to encourage and motivate you to be faithful in your walk with God, and my preaching will convict you if you are not obeying the truths you have already learned.
The work of actually putting foundational truths in place in your heart and life is done by the Holy Spirit. If you do not cooperate with Him in this work, you will remain spiritually immature and will continually struggle in your walk with God. The proof will be in the fruit your life produces.
As a natural example, think of it this way. You are a piece of ground where a structure is going to be built. God provides the materials you need to build a proper foundation and erect the building that will be constructed on it. These materials are
/page(48)

the truths and revelation the Spirit brings into your life through preaching, reading the Word, direct revelation, study and experience.
I may have placed many of the materials on your piece of ground. This is especially true if you have been a part of Servants of the Lord Ministries. My question is: Have you allowed the Spirit to place the building blocks of truth in your heart? In other words, have you believed the truths the Spirit has revealed to you, repented of what is contrary to those truths, and begun to obey them consistently?
The Chief Cornerstone
If you continue to struggle spiritually, your foundation stones have not been laid properly. Because of this, you must go back to the first works, the initial foundation on which all else is built. The most basic foundation is your personal relationship with Jesus Christ.
This book is about doing the first works. Revelation 2:4-5 says, “Nevertheless I have this against you, that you have left your first love. Remember therefore from where you have fallen; repent and do the first works, or else I will come to you quickly and remove your lampstand from its place— unless you repent.” It is time to choose the Lord as your first love. It is time to repent and do the first works. Nothing is more important than your personal relationship with Jesus Christ.
Each topic in this book is vitally important. Whether you were recently saved or have walked with God for years, it is crucial that each truth covered in this book becomes a foundation stone that is securely established in your spirit.
The most basic foundation is
your personal relationship with Jesus Christ.
/page(49)

The most important foundation stone placed in a new building is the cornerstone. In the same way, Jesus is the Cornerstone of your Christian life. Your relationship with Jesus establishes the Cornerstone of your spiritual building. Every other foundation stone originates from this Cornerstone. If your relationship with Jesus Christ is not practiced at all times, then your spiritual building will not increase as it should. Setting the Cornerstone properly sets the course of your life.
If Jesus is not your first love and the Lord of your life consistently, this Cornerstone is not set in place. I cannot stress this enough. If the fruit in your life does not reflect His Lordship and your love for Him, the cornerstone for your spiritual building is not set in place.
Hebrews 12:2a says, “Looking unto Jesus, the author and finisher of our faith...” He is the beginning and the end. All other foundation stones are connected to Him as the Chief Cornerstone.
If Jesus is not your first love and the Lord of your life,
the Cornerstone is not set in place.
When Jesus is firmly set in place as the Chief Cornerstone, other necessary foundation stones are laid so your spiritual building can go higher. As you mature, the Cornerstone stays the same. Regardless of your level of maturity, this must be continually monitored. If you struggle at any point, you must go back to the first foundation stone – your personal relationship with Jesus Christ.
Jesus is the architect and the Holy Spirit is the construction foreman of the spiritual house He is building in you. He knows the plan for your life and He must be in charge at all times! Regardless of where you are spiritually, you must
/page(50)

always go back and confirm that this first work is being maintained.
This book is about your spiritual infancy and childhood because this phase of your spiritual life is so important. It may seem very simplistic to you, but I assure you that everything in it is crucial for you to be spiritually healthy and strong. Whatever your current level of maturity is, these teachings are for you.
I have been an apostle for many years, and the truths in this book are still the most precious to me. I always stay focused on my personal relationship with Jesus Christ, loving Him with all my heart, and obeying Him without question. Anything that God calls me to do or anywhere He tells me to go, I obey because He truly is my first love. I made the choice to love Him more than anyone or anything else many years ago, and I have never repented of that decision. You can make that choice, too. It will change your life.
Foundation Analogy
In the spiritual realm, you cannot lay your own foundation. This work must be done by Jesus. Once again, think of this in terms of a building being built on a parcel of ground. All of the truths you have received from God are like blocks that have been placed on your spiritual ground. You may recognize them as foundation stones you need, but you must allow the Master Builder (Jesus) to purify each stone and place it where it belongs. Remember: This work can only be done by the Lord Jesus through the Holy Spirit!
How do you know if the proper spiritual foundation has been laid in you? It is simple. Look at your fruit. Look at the results of the spiritual truths that have been established in your life. As soon as the Lord builds a foundation capable of supporting additional truth, He will immediately build on the foundation. Building on your foundation (adding new
/page(51)

truths) and expanding it (deepening and increasing truths) are ongoing works.
Building on your foundation and expanding it are ongoing works.
There are many areas of your spiritual life. They all need to be set on the solid foundation of Jesus Christ as your Lord. The foundation does not have to be completed or “perfect” before the Lord starts building on it. A properly laid spiritual foundation allows you to consistently walk in the Spirit. You should continue to experience additions to your foundation and building to a higher level throughout your life. God will alternate between these two. Some action should be ongoing at all times and you should be able to see good fruit.
If your spiritual foundation has not been laid properly, you must go back to the first works. If you do not obey a truth consistently, it is not placed in your foundation. Merely knowing a truth does not set it in place. You must accept each truth by faith, humble yourself before the Lord (the Builder), and repent of any disobedience to the truth.
If Jesus is your Lord and you obey Him consistently, you will have fruit proving it to be the truth. You must always obey the Word for the stone to stay in place. Every time you take over lordship, you move foundation stones out of place. Jesus’ Lordship has to be continual in your life.
Once Jesus lays a foundation stone in you by the Spirit and you habitually obey it, God will strengthen the stone and deepen it so it can handle more pressure. In other words, your spiritual building can go higher. This is an ongoing process. But remember, this process cannot take place if you refuse to let God put the stone in the right place. It will not stay in the right place if you take over lordship. This is why Jesus’ Lordship cannot be part-time! Your obedience has to be constant.
/page(52)

With the foundation analogy, you must remember that when you allow Jesus to function as your Lord, He begins His work where you are. Before He can build something new He must first tear down and remove what you have built. Then He can prepare your spiritual ground for His foundation and building. Remember: God’s ways are higher than yours. Isaiah 55:9 says, “For as the heavens are higher than the earth, So are My ways higher than your ways, And My thoughts than your thoughts.”
Note: Any natural illustration of a spiritual principle is very limited. The danger with using a natural parable to understand a spiritual principle is that you can understand the natural parable from your reasoning. But as I have said many times, you cannot understand spiritual things from your natural mind. You must be in the Spirit, listening to His instructions and explanations, to understand any spiritual concept.
Warning!
If you realize that pressure, life circumstances, and difficulties move you into the flesh, your foundation stones are either not settled in their place or they are not strong or deep enough. Once again, look at your fruit! You can choose to trust the Lord and obey Him even when you are facing hard situations. This is an opportunity to mortify your flesh, which you are commanded to do in Colossians 3:5.
Do not give yourself permission to resist a situation or run from it when your flesh tries to react. If you choose to trust the Lord and do what He says, in spite of what your flesh is saying, He will provide the grace and strength to obey.
1 Corinthians 10:13 says, “No temptation has overtaken you except such as is common to man; but God is faithful, who will not allow you to be tempted beyond what you are able, but with the temptation will also make the way of escape, that you may be able to bear it.” In this verse, the word
/page(53)

temptation means, “a putting to proof...adversity...an experiment, attempt, trial, proving; adversity, affliction, trouble: sent by God and serving to test or prove one’s character, faith, holiness... ” (Strong’s Greek #3986). The Lord will not test you beyond what you are able to endure, and He will always make a way of escape.
It is important to remember that your flesh may lie to you and say you cannot endure a situation because it is too hard. God provides the way of escape based on His definitions, not yours. If He does not remove a difficulty, He promises in 2 Corinthians 12:9 that His grace is more than enough, regardless of the situation. “And He said to me, ‘My grace is sufficient for you, for My strength is made perfect in weakness.’ Therefore most gladly I will rather boast in my infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest upon me.”
Whatever the difficulty, God’s grace is sufficient for you.
Pressure will actually move your foundation stones deeper and make you spiritually stronger if you process it correctly. If you continue to submit to the Lordship of Jesus Christ, He will work every trial and pressure to your benefit. Remember Romans 8:28. “And we know that all things work together for good to those who love God, to those who are the called according to His purpose.”
You will be encouraged if you stay focused on the fact that Jesus is not only the author of your faith, He is also the finisher of your faith (Hebrews 12:2a). He must be Lord from the beginning to the end. You can be assured that every situation you face is covered by His grace. When He allows difficulty to help you become established in your faith, He can be trusted.
/page(54)

Assignment
Ask the Lord to answer the following questions:
* Is Jesus my first love?
* Is Jesus the literal, functional Lord of my life?
* If the answers to questions 1 and 2 are only true
part of the time, to what percentage are they
true?
* How consistent is my personal relationship with
Jesus Christ?
If Jesus is your first love and your Lord only part of the time, ask for His forgiveness. Believe 1 John 1:9! “If we confess our sins, He is faithful and just to forgive us our sins and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.”
Ask the Holy Spirit to show you how to walk out your repentance. Make a page in your notebook for each hindrance He exposes that keeps you from obeying the Lord and loving Him. Then systematically work through each reason in the Spirit, repenting of everything He shows you. There are reasons why Jesus is not your first love and your Lord. The Spirit knows all of these reasons, and He will show you how to repent of each one.
/page(55)

Reference Verses for Chapter 3
1 Corinthians 3:10-11
According to the grace of God which was given to me, as a wise master builder I have laid the foundation, and another builds on it. But let each one take heed how he builds on it. For no other foundation can anyone lay than that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ.
Revelation 2:4-5
Nevertheless I have this against you, that you have left your first love. Remember therefore from where you have fallen; repent and do the first works, or else I will come to you quickly and remove your lampstand from its place—unless you repent.
Hebrews 12:2a
Looking unto Jesus, the author and finisher of our faith...
Isaiah 55:9
For as the heavens are higher than the earth, So are My ways higher than your ways, And My thoughts than your thoughts.
Colossians 3:5
Therefore put to death your members which are on the earth: fornication, uncleanness, passion, evil desire, and covetousness, which is idolatry.
1 Corinthians 10:13
No temptation has overtaken you except such as is common to man; but God is faithful, who will not allow you to be tempted beyond what you are able, but with the temptation will also make the way of escape, that you may be able to bear it.
2 Corinthians 12:9
And He said to me, “My grace is sufficient for you, for My strength is made perfect in weakness.” Therefore, most gladly
/page(56)

I will rather boast in my infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest upon me.
Romans 8:28
And we know that all things work together for good to those who love God, to those who are the called according to His purpose.
1 John 1:9
If we confess our sins, He is faithful and just to forgive us our sins and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.
/page(57)

Chapter 4
Understanding and Enjoying Your Salvation
One major reason why Christians have trouble moving deeper spiritually is because what they think they know hinders them from learning what God wants them to know. For example, many Christians think they know all about salvation yet have never spent time letting God show them exactly what He provided for them when they were redeemed.
This book series is entitled Foundations for Spiritual Maturity. It is important to take time to focus on what you received at salvation, because it is the first foundation. It is because of Jesus’ death on the cross that you are saved. This may seem elementary but your salvation is the source of everything you have in God. If this first foundation is not set properly, nothing else will work. So let us take a look at the very beginning of your relationship with God.
Saved by Grace
At the moment you were born again, you went from being totally lost and doomed to hell to being saved by God’s grace. Your salvation was not based on any quality you possessed or any good works you may have done. Ephesians 2:8-9 says, “For by grace you have been saved through faith, and that not of yourselves; it is the gift of God, not of works, lest
/page(58)

anyone should boast.” Titus 3:4-5 says, “But when the kindness and the love of God our Savior toward man appeared, not by works of righteousness which we have done, but according to His mercy He saved us, through the washing of regeneration and renewing of the Holy Spirit.” You did nothing to earn or deserve your redemption. It is a gift from God!
Your salvation is not based on any quality you possess or good works you have done.
Everything you have and everything you will receive in the future, regardless of your level of spiritual maturity, is a gift from God. You cannot do anything to earn God’s gifts.
Some spiritual gifts and promises have conditions. For example, Romans 8:28 says, “And we know that all things work together for good to those who love God, to those who are the called according to His purpose.” This is a promise (gift) that requires something from you. God will work all things to your good if you love Him and are called according to His purpose. The Word and the Holy Spirit will reveal God’s promises to you and show you any conditions necessary to receive the promises.
Why Did You Get Saved?
What was your motive for getting saved? Many believers got saved because they heard the Gospel preached and did not want to go to hell. They basically wanted “fire insurance.” They never thought about the privilege of being God’s child, much less the responsibilities.
Getting saved for a very shallow reason will affect the rest of your Christian life. Your main motive for seeking God should be because you love Him. I cannot stress this enough.
/page(59)

If you want to have a close relationship with God, your motive for seeking Him must be pure. If you want to hear the Lord and know Him for any reason other than because you love Him, your walk with Him will be greatly hindered.
Any motive for seeking the Lord other than love will hinder your walk with God.
Even good motives for seeking God can interfere with the purity of your relationship with Him. For example, if you want God to help you be a good preacher, a dynamic evangelist, or to be financially blessed, you need to look at your motives. Is there any selfishness in these motives? Some motives are not evil in themselves, but they should never take priority over your motive to seek and love God with your whole heart, regardless of what He chooses to do or not do in your life.
Sadly, many believers look at salvation in a very limited way even if they did get saved for the right reason. They do not see the magnitude of the blessing they have received. They settle for being a superficial Christian whose walk lacks intimacy, often because they do not know anything else is available.
Conviction and Salvation
One of the Holy Spirit’s jobs is to convince you that you are lost. It is likely that when you were saved, this conviction came through preaching. The Spirit convicted you and you believed what the Word said about your spiritual condition. Then you heard the Good News of what Jesus did on the cross. When you accepted what He did for you and confessed your sin, you were saved. The Spirit came into you and the first
/page(60)

thing He did was bear witness that you were a child of God (Romans 8:16).
You should have felt the burden of conviction before you got saved. At repentance, the burden lifted and you should have felt wonderful because you were forgiven of all of your sins. As guilt and shame left, joy and peace came because you were made right with God and were no longer condemned to hell.
The more thoroughly you accepted the reality of where you were and the more open you were to the salvation Jesus provided for you, the more dramatic your conversion experience was. It is tragic to have a mild conversion. If you experienced deep conviction, you also enjoyed great relief when you were saved.
If you were truly saved, you were translated from the kingdom of darkness to the kingdom of Jesus. Colossians 1:13 says, “He has delivered us from the power of darkness and conveyed us into the kingdom of the Son of His love.” When you moved into God’s kingdom, you were in the Spirit. You did not do any works to receive this. (This truth is repeated many times in this book because it is so important.) You cannot do works to earn fellowship with God.
I ask you to stop right now and examine yourself. Ask the Spirit to show you where you are spiritually. Ask the Lord if you are trying to complete the work He began in you by the Spirit with good works of the flesh. Galatians 3:3 (KJV) says, “Are ye so foolish? having begun in the Spirit, are ye now made perfect by the flesh?”
The Gift of Salvation
God intends for His children to enjoy the many blessings that come in the “package” of salvation. If you think of salvation as a boxed gift, what items are in the box? At one moment in time, you humbled yourself and repented before
/page(61)

God. You confessed your sins and asked Jesus to come into your heart. You experienced God’s love and forgiveness.
At that instant, the Spirit of the Lord came into your heart and you were born into the family of God. God made the choice to accept you as His child. The God of the universe became your Father! Galatians 4:6 says, “And because you are sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of His Son into your hearts, crying out, ‘Abba, Father!’ ”
If you take some time to meditate on the gift of salvation, you will begin to see the magnitude of what Jesus has done for you. There are tremendous benefits available for every child of God. What you received the moment you were saved will affect you for all eternity. As I said earlier, it has nothing to do with your works. You cannot earn the grace you received at salvation. It is a gift from God!
Being born again gives you many opportunities to enjoy the gifts God gives to His children. However, many believers do not avail themselves of these gifts. They never take the time to find out what the gifts are or what conditions must be met to receive them. Some of God’s gifts require you to meet His conditions, but others have no conditions. It is important to learn about both so you can enjoy all of the gifts God has for you.
The following is a list of blessings you received when you were born again. This is not an exhaustive list by any means. The blessings of salvation are endless! I have merely listed some that have a great impact on your walk with God. (Several scriptures are included with each item on this list but there are many other verses in the Word that confirm each truth. I strongly suggest that you spend time researching all of the scriptures that pertain to each gift listed.)
* You received the gift of eternal life. John 17:3 says, “And this is eternal life, that they may know You, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom You have sent.” Through the gift of
/page(62)

salvation, you can know the only true God and His Son. This is the definition of eternal life. The main reason Jesus came to die for you was so you can have a personal relationship with God. Many believers do not know what eternal life means and they do not enjoy it in their lives. (For in-depth details about the gift of eternal life, see Chapter 5.)
* The Holy Spirit became your Comforter and Teacher. At the moment you were saved, the Holy Spirit came into your heart. The Spirit bears witness to the truth. He is your Comforter, and He will lead you into all truth. John 15:26 (KJV) says, “But when the Comforter is come, whom I will send unto you from the Father, even the Spirit of truth, which proceedeth from the Father, he shall testify of me.” John 16:13 says, “However, when He, the Spirit of truth, has come, He will guide you into all truth; for He will not speak on His own authority, but whatever He hears He will speak; and He will tell you things to come.” John 14:26 says, “But the Helper, the Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in My name, He will teach you all things, and bring to your remembrance all things that I said to you.” 1 Corinthians 2:13 says, “These things we also speak, not in words which man’s wisdom teaches but which the Holy Spirit teaches, comparing spiritual things with spiritual.” 1 John 5:6b says, “...And it is the Spirit who bears witness, because the Spirit is truth.”
* You were cleansed from unrighteousness. When you confessed your sin, God cleansed you
/page(63)

from all unrighteousness (1 John 1:9). Your sins were not covered; they were washed away. Every contamination was removed by the blood of Jesus. Isaiah 1:18 says, “ ‘Come now, and let us reason together,’ Says the LORD, ‘Though your sins are like scarlet, They shall be as white as snow; Though they are red like crimson, They shall be as wool.’ ” Your sins were completely removed when you repented and asked Jesus to come into your heart.
* You were justified. Romans 5:1 (KJV) says, “Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ.” A simple definition of justified is, “just as if I had never sinned.” At salvation, you were made clean before God. Please take some time to ponder on this wondrous work! Galatians 2:16a says, “Knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the law but by faith in Jesus Christ...”
* Your spirit was sealed by the Holy Spirit. He bears witness that you are a child of God according to Romans 8:16. 2 Corinthians 1:21-22 says, “Now He who establishes us with you in Christ and has anointed us is God, who also has sealed us and given us the Spirit in our hearts as a guarantee.” You must first be cleansed before you can be sealed. When you are sealed by the Spirit, the enemy has no more access to your spirit.
* You moved into God’s presence. Because your guilt was removed, you were able to come before Almighty God with a pure heart. (Important: If nothing changed in your heart or your life, it is
/page(64)

unlikely you were truly saved.) It is important to understand what moved you into God’s presence and what is necessary to stay in His presence. Isaiah 59:2 says, “But your iniquities have separated you from your God; And your sins have hidden His face from you, So that He will not hear.” Jesus’ forgiveness removed the barrier of sin and allowed you to come boldly before the throne of grace (Hebrews 4:16).
* You were given a new nature. The old carnal nature was condemned and you received a new nature (Christ’s nature). All sin is condemned in the flesh according to Romans 8:3. You are instructed to mortify your old nature (Colossians 3:5) and be resurrected in the new nature. From that point on, you are commanded to only yield your members to obey the new (Christ) nature. Whichever nature you obey, that is the one you are a servant of (Romans 6:16).
* Old things began to pass away and all things became new (2 Corinthians 5:17). Your sins were forgiven at the moment you were saved, but that does not mean all of the habits of sin have been removed. Jesus washes you with the water of the Word to complete this work. Ephesians 5:26 says, “That He might sanctify and cleanse her with the washing of water by the word.”
* You fell in love with the Lord. If this did not happen, something is wrong! In addition, if you do not seek a relationship with God after getting saved, your love will grow cold. You will become complacent and the blessings you were given at salvation will not be apparent in your
/page(65)

life. It is important to enjoy each phase of your spiritual life, especially when you are a baby. This is the time to develop intimacy with God. Learn to enjoy quiet times of fellowship with Him.
* You were born into God’s family. John 1:12 says, “But as many as received Him, to them He gave the right to become children of God, to those who believe in His name.” What an amazing promise! All you have to do to become a child of the Almighty God is confess your sins and accept Jesus as your Savior. Romans 8:15b says, “...but you received the Spirit of adoption by whom we cry out, ‘Abba, Father.’ ” 2 Corinthians 6:18 says, “I will be a Father to you, And you shall be My sons and daughters, Says the LORD Almighty.”
* You were given the power to become a son of God. Romans 8:14 says, “For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, these are the sons of God.” There is a big difference between being a young child of God and being manifested as a mature son of God. This requires you to be led by the Spirit. The Spirit will change you from a child of God to a son of God as you yield to Him.
* You received the empowering of the Holy Spirit. One of the Spirit’s jobs is to give you the power to overcome your flesh. Acts 1:8 says, “But you shall receive power when the Holy Spirit has come upon you; and you shall be witnesses to Me in Jerusalem, and in all Judea and Samaria, and to the end of the earth.” The gifts of the Spirit listed in 1 Corinthians 12 are
/page(66)

also tremendous blessings. The Spirit you received at salvation can manifest in many different ways. There is one Holy Spirit. If you are truly born again, the Holy Spirit entered you at that moment. He bore witness in your spirit that you were a child of God (see previous sections of this chapter for details). As you study the Word, hear teaching and receive direct revelation from the Spirit, you will discover different ways the Spirit can manifest. If you meet God’s conditions, ask and believe, then you will receive. The authorization to experience the Spirit in multiple manifestations was given at the new birth as part of salvation. Ask the Spirit to show you new ways He wants to manifest in you. Follow His instructions and you will experience Him in many exciting ways.
* You were given the opportunity to live in the kingdom of God now by the Spirit. Most of the Christian world has not received teaching on our ability to live in the kingdom of God now by the Spirit. Most believers’ references to the kingdom of God are either in the past or in the future. It is critically important to understand what is available to you now. The day you got saved, you were translated into God’s kingdom and became an heir with Jesus Christ. Every child of God has been authorized to live in the kingdom of God in the spiritual realm now. (For details on how to live in God’s kingdom, please read my book, The Kingdom of God Now.)
If you did not appropriate these blessings at the beginning of your spiritual walk, start now! Go back to the first works and ask God to show you what He authorized for
/page(67)

you at the moment you were saved. The Holy Spirit has been authorized to do many things in you simply because you are God’s child.
Do not limit what the Spirit does in you because of unbelief. Give Him complete freedom to work in your heart. Begin by putting all of your focus on your love relationship with Jesus. Choose to obey Him simply because you love Him, and allow the Spirit to do His job. Then everything else will fall in place.
God Has a Plan
Many Christians spend their whole lives not knowing God’s purpose for them, but He has a calling for each individual. Jesus has a specific plan for you. This plan includes everything you do each and every day. The Father works in you by the Spirit to prepare you to fit into the body of Christ where you belong. If you do not allow God to teach and prepare you by the Spirit, you will never fulfill your intended purpose.
You must learn to bow before God in humble adoration and submit to His training. As you cooperate with Him, your nature will begin to change as old things pass away and all things become new. As you are being prepared, God will anoint you to do the work He has called you to do. You should be diligent about the Father’s work, regardless of what you are called to do. This includes secular callings as well as spiritual callings. It does not matter if you are a student, a plumber, a preacher or a homemaker. God has a plan for you.
The first thing God authorizes is for you to be a baby who is nurtured by His love. Then He authorizes you to be a student. At every stage from birth through the levels (grades) in God’s school, the Spirit will direct you as you seek His will. This process should be a way of life for Christians. You should
/page(68)

grow up talking and listening to God as He prepares you for every good work (Hebrews 13:21).
Matthew 9:29b says, “...According to your faith let it be to you.” If you are unable to believe you can have this kind of relationship with God, ask Him to show you the reasons your faith is hindered. Deal with these hindrances one at a time as the Holy Spirit directs. When all hindrances are removed, your faith will flow and activate God’s promises.
At salvation, you had the first opportunity to walk as a spiritual person as opposed to a natural person. You began by moving into the Spirit through repentance, but you have to learn how to stay and grow up in the Spirit. These principles can be learned while you are still a baby because being able to live in the Spirit has nothing to do with works or maturity. God wants you to remain in fellowship with Him from the moment you are saved. It is part of the package of salvation that was given by grace through faith. Grace and faith enabled you to move into the Spirit, and they will keep you in the Spirit as you grow up.
Warning!
The greatest danger you face as you seek to enjoy the gifts of salvation is believing you have to do something to receive the gifts. All you have to do from infancy through maturity is draw near to God. James 4:8a says, “Draw near to God and He will draw near to you...” When God draws near to you, He provides everything you need to enjoy a deepening relationship with Him. All you have to do is listen and obey. Everything else is His responsibility. Stop helping God! If your spiritual life is not working, you are helping in some way. Remember this quote from Arthur Burt in Pebbles to Slay Goliath:
/page(69)

“If you help God a lot, He can do a little.
If you only help Him a little, He can do a lot.
But if you don’t help Him at all, He can do anything.
Let go and let God.”
When you do good works or obey the truths you receive from God in your spiritualized flesh, you are trying to help Him. Your good works may look spiritual, but they will not produce intimacy with God. You should be doing good works because you have a relationship with Him. You do the works He directs because you love Him, not to get something from Him.
/page(70)

Assignment
Ask the Lord to show you what He has already given you simply because you are saved. Keep it simple. Remember the warning in James 1:22. “But be doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving yourselves.” If you are hearing the Word but not obeying it, you are deceiving yourself.
In a section of your notebook, make a list of the things you received at salvation and ask the Lord the simple question, “Am I enjoying this part of my heritage?” If you are not, ask the Spirit to show you why. Make the necessary adjustments so you can enjoy all God has provided for you.
God wants you to enjoy every part of your salvation. If there are conditions to receiving a certain promise, you need to know what they are and how to meet them. Again, this is the job of the Holy Spirit. Your job is to seek for answers and obey them when they come. Make notes on your progress until the different aspects of salvation are evident in your life.
If your relationship with the Lord is not working, there is no excuse. There are simply reasons. The Holy Spirit will show you the reasons and what you need to do to get rid of them. Then it will work. It is as simple as that.
Secondly, ask God to show you the ways you are hindering His work in your life by doing good works, legalistically obeying the truths in His Word, or believing your denomination’s doctrines without confirming them by the Spirit. You may be surprised to find that much of what you think is spiritual in your life is actually spiritualized flesh.
Let me remind you again: Do not get discouraged during this process. Instead of focusing on how you have failed, rejoice that you are identifying hindrances that can be removed through repentance. As you repent, your joy will increase dramatically!
/page(71)

Reference Verses for Chapter 4
Ephesians 2:8-9
For by grace you have been saved through faith, and that not of yourselves; it is the gift of God, not of works, lest anyone should boast.
Titus 3:4-5
But when the kindness and the love of God our Savior toward man appeared, not by works of righteousness which we have done, but according to His mercy He saved us, through the washing of regeneration and renewing of the Holy Spirit.
Romans 8:28
And we know that all things work together for good to those who love God, to those who are the called according to His purpose.
Romans 8:16
The Spirit Himself bears witness with our spirit that we are children of God.
Colossians 1:13
He has delivered us from the power of darkness and conveyed us into the kingdom of the Son of His love.
Galatians 3:3 (KJV)
Are ye so foolish? having begun in the Spirit, are ye now made perfect by the flesh?
Galatians 4:6
And because you are sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of His Son into your hearts, crying out, “Abba, Father!”
/page(72)

John 17:3
And this is eternal life, that they may know You, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom You have sent.
John 15:26 (KJV)
But when the Comforter is come, whom I will send unto you from the Father, even the Spirit of truth, which proceedeth from the Father, he shall testify of me.
John 16:13
However, when He, the Spirit of truth, has come, He will guide you into all truth; for He will not speak on His own authority, but whatever He hears He will speak; and He will tell you things to come.
John 14:26
But the Helper, the Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in My name, He will teach you all things, and bring to your remembrance all things that I said to you.
1 Corinthians 2:13
These things we also speak, not in words which man’s wisdom teaches but which the Holy Spirit teaches, comparing spiritual things with spiritual.
1 John 5:6b
...And it is the Spirit who bears witness, because the Spirit is truth.
1 John 1:9
If we confess our sins, He is faithful and just to forgive us our sins and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.
Isaiah 1:18
“Come now, and let us reason together,” Says the LORD, “Though your sins are like scarlet, They shall be as white as
/page(73)

snow; Though they are red like crimson, They shall be as wool.”
Romans 5:1 (KJV)
Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ.
Galatians 2:16a
Knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the law but by faith in Jesus Christ...
2 Corinthians 1:21-22
Now He who establishes us with you in Christ and has anointed us is God, who also has sealed us and given us the Spirit in our hearts as a guarantee.
Isaiah 59:2
But your iniquities have separated you from your God; And your sins hidden His face from you, So that He will not hear.
Hebrews 4:16
Let us therefore come boldly to the throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy and find grace to help in time of need.
Romans 8:3
For what the law could not do in that it was weak through the flesh, God did by sending His own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, on account of sin: He condemned sin in the flesh.
Colossians 3:5
Therefore put to death your members which are on the earth: fornication, uncleanness, passion, evil desire, and covetousness, which is idolatry.
Romans 6:16
Do you not know that to whom you present yourselves slaves
/page(74)

to obey, you are that one's slave whom you obey, whether of sin leading to death, or of obedience leading to righteousness?
2 Corinthians 5:17
Therefore, if anyone is in Christ, he is a new creation; old things have passed away; behold, all things have become new.
Ephesians 5:26
That He might sanctify and cleanse her with the washing of water by the word.
John 1:12
But as many as received Him, to them He gave the right to become children of God, to those who believe in His name.
Romans 8:15b
...but you received the Spirit of adoption by whom we cry out, “Abba, Father.”
2 Corinthians 6:18
I will be a Father to you, And you shall be My sons and daughters, Says the LORD Almighty.
Romans 8:14
For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, these are the sons of God.
Acts 1:8
But you shall receive power when the Holy Spirit has come upon you; and you shall be witnesses to Me in Jerusalem, and in all Judea and Samaria, and to the end of the earth.
1 Corinthians 12
Hebrews 13:21
Make you complete in every good work to do His will, working
/page(75)

in you what is well pleasing in His sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory forever and ever. Amen.
Matthew 9:29b
...According to your faith let it be to you.
James 4:8a
Draw near to God and He will draw near to you...
James 1:22
But be doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving yourselves.
/page(76)

Chapter 5
The Greatest Gift
Of the many gifts that come with salvation, I believe the gift of eternal life is the most important. John 17:3 says, “And this is eternal life, that they may know You, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom You have sent.” As I shared earlier, the word know in this scripture basically means, “to know in a personal, experiential way, as in the way a husband is to know his wife” (Strong’s Greek #1097). The opportunity to know God intimately is a precious gift and a privilege. It is part of the salvation package, but many believers never experience a close, personal and consistent relationship with their Lord.
God has authorized you to have a relationship with Him and the Lord Jesus, through the Holy Spirit. To fulfill this gift, God has made the provision for you to spend quality time in Their presence. He has also made the way to have two-way communication with Them. Without this type of communication, the gift of eternal life cannot be manifested and fulfilled.
Developing Intimacy with God
Anyone who has been around Servants of the Lord Ministries or read any of my books knows that the key message of our ministry is developing a love relationship with God. This is not meant to be difficult, and it should have begun the first day you got saved. This relationship has
/page(77)

absolutely nothing to do with works or maturity. This gift came by grace through faith (Ephesians 2:8). If you try to achieve this relationship through good works, obeying religious doctrines or legalism, it will not happen.
If you find it difficult to have this kind of relationship with God, this is evidence that you are listening to the enemy. If you sincerely seek this relationship, satan is not likely to tempt you with obvious evil. Instead, he will deceive you with thoughts that seem right to your mind.
Following ways that seem right will not produce the relationship you seek. One of satan’s deceptions is to convince you that you must do good works or be spiritually mature before you can have fellowship with God. If you are not sure whether you are deceived in this area, look at your fruit! If you are “trying hard” to be godly or do what is right but continue to manifest works of the flesh, it is confirmation that you are deceived. It is an indication that you have been seduced by ways that seem right.
Ways that seem right will never produce intimacy with God and godly fruit.
Common Ways That Seem Right
The devil, who is the father of lies, deceives new Christians by supplying false instructions about what it takes to develop a close relationship with God. Very few new Christians are taught what the gift of eternal life is or how to develop intimacy with their Father. They are normally told by church leadership to read the Bible, stop sinning, go to church, be submitted to a pastor, witness to others, and so on. They are told that doing good works will cause them to grow in the grace and knowledge of the Lord. The problem is that doing
/page(78)

all of these works does not meet the conditions for having a deepening relationship with the Lord.
If you try to do works to gain this relationship, it actually disqualifies you. You are trying to get to the Father some other way than through Jesus and what He provided. John 10:1 says, “Most assuredly, I say to you, he who does not enter the sheepfold by the door, but climbs up some other way, the same is a thief and a robber.” There is only one way to the Father and that is through His Son, Jesus Christ.
Doing these works is important, but not if you do them to gain a relationship with God. This is the wrong motivation and it does not work. The gift of eternal life makes the way for you to have a relationship with God by grace. You can spend time in His arms, close to His heart!
Once you are in God’s presence and He can communicate with you, He will instruct you to do these things. The difference is that you will be doing them because you love Him and He directed you to do them, not because you are trying to earn fellowship with Him.
Doing good works will not produce a relationship with God!
By Grace Through Faith
If you have been away from the Lord, you do the same thing you did at the very beginning to get into His presence. It does not matter if you have been away for a few minutes or many years. You repent of any sin that separates you from God, and believe what the Word says. 1 John 1:9 says, “If we confess our sins, He is faithful and just to forgive us our sins and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.” This removes the barrier between you and God.
/page(79)

Everything you receive from God is activated by grace through faith. Ephesians 2:8-9 says, “For by grace you have been saved through faith, and that not of yourselves; it is the gift of God, not of works, lest anyone should boast.” Salvation and the gift of eternal life are gifts that come from God through faith alone, not by any works you do. Doing good works has nothing to do with your ability to know God.
Believe to Receive
You must believe (without doubting) that God will do what He says He will do. Your Father has proclaimed that a personal relationship with Him is available to you. It is a gift! But you must believe that this gift is for you personally.
Everything God has provided for you now and in the future is received by faith. If satan can keep you ignorant of God’s promises or cause you to doubt that you can receive them, then you will not be able to enjoy what God has promised. The devil’s goal is to rob you of your inheritance in every area. He does not want you to have a close, personal relationship with your Father.
satan will also try to confuse you about what faith in God is. He will distract you by encouraging you to have faith in yourself and your abilities. Release your faith into God and His Word! If God has spoken to you directly or through His Word, then all you have to do is have faith in Him. Faith is simply trusting God that He (not you) is trustworthy to do what He says He will do. For you to receive any promise from Him, you must believe what He said and release your faith into Him.
Keep it simple. If you have doubts, which hinder your faith, then deal with them. Any doubt that hinders you from believing the truth is the fruit of a lie you already believe to be true. Allow the Holy Spirit to show you why it is a lie.
/page(80)

Once you are convinced, you will quit believing the lie. Your faith can then be released into the truth.
There may be reasons why you cannot do this. This is where the work comes in. Seek God for the reasons and at His direction remove them through repentance until there are no more reasons. Then you can believe. Once you believe, having met God’s conditions, you will receive. It is not complicated but it must be done accurately.
satan’s Tricks
When you are deceived, you disqualify yourself from God’s provision. If you stumble in this area, quit making excuses, and stop receiving condemnation from the enemy. He is a liar and he does not want you to have fellowship with God! Face your mistakes and recognize the opportunity given to you by your Teacher to learn. Repent, go to the Teacher for instructions, and simply follow His directions. He will help you remove any hindrances and then you can receive the promises.
An important reminder: Do not let satan have any part of this process! Every promise in God’s Word is received by faith. It is not complicated. The father of lies tries to make it complicated in order to confuse and deceive you. Struggling to have a relationship with your Father proves whose voice you are listening to. It is not God! It is satan. He will either condemn you or come as an angel of light by providing ways that seem right to your natural mind.
The devil’s deceptions can only work if you operate in your natural mind by trusting in your reasoning and understanding. Dependence on your natural abilities is disobedience to what God has instructed you to do. When you are in the flesh (controlled by your natural mind), you give access to the devil and yield yourself to obey him. When you repent and yield to the Lordship of Jesus, you move back into
/page(81)

the Spirit. As you yield to Him, He will begin giving instructions.
If you are not hearing instructions from the Holy Spirit, you are in the flesh. There is no need to keep struggling. Go back to the first foundation. Humble yourself before the Lord. Repent of any wrongdoing and ask Him why you are not in the Spirit even if you seem to be following the instructions.
Follow God’s Instructions
If your relationship with the Lord is not working, the instructions are not the problem. You are not doing them correctly. The first thing you need to do is repent. Then ask the Lord why you were not in the Spirit. Once again, there are only reasons why it is not working. They may be simple reasons, but when they are identified and repented of, the relationship works.
Many Christians fail to receive God’s promises because satan keeps them ignorant of the conditions that lead to the fulfillment of the promises. He also provides wrong definitions of what the promises actually are. Examine yourself to see if you are accepting any of satan’s “reasons” for not enjoying the gift of eternal life.
The directions in the first book I wrote, My Sheep Hear My Voice, are simple. They have worked consistently in my life for over forty years and also in the lives of many Christians around the world. Do not allow the enemy to question the instructions. You may think you are following them from what you can see naturally, but you must obey them in the Spirit.
Do not allow the enemy to provide you with excuses for not walking in consistent communion with God. Ask the Holy Spirit to show you the reasons why it is not working. Then you can start making progress.
/page(82)

Purify Your Faith
One of the most important parts of this process is the purification of your faith. Your faith cannot flow if it is released into lies. When you release your faith into lies, it is misdirected. This keeps you from being able to release your faith into God and His truth. As you identify these areas and quit believing the lies, your faith will return to you. Then you can release it into the truth. The truth will then be activated in your life.
This is an ongoing process. The ultimate goal is that your faith is only released into truth. You must test what you believe to determine if it is the truth. Using the three witnesses (Jesus the Word, the witness of the Holy Spirit and the peace of God) is crucial to discovering truth and being able to release your faith into it.
Start by making the decision to trust God with all of your heart. As you allow God to expose the areas where you do not trust Him, you will progress toward the mark and it is counted to you as righteousness. Choose to trust Him without any boundaries or conditions. This includes areas He has not yet brought to your attention. Be open to whatever He says now and in the future. Maintain your decision to trust Him regardless of what He says or does.
Trust God without any boundaries or conditions.
/page(83)

Assignment
Come before the Lord without an opinion about where you are spiritually. Ask Him if the gift of eternal life is manifesting in you; and if so, to what level you are enjoying this gift. Ask Him if your fellowship with Him is hindered because you have released your faith into satan’s lies rather than the pure promises of God and His Word. Ask the Lord to show you any ways that seem right that hinder your intimacy with Him.
/page(84)

Reference Verses for Chapter 5
John 17:3
And this is eternal life, that they may know You, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom You have sent.
Ephesians 2:8
For by grace you have been saved through faith, and that not of yourselves; it is the gift of God.
John 10:1
Most assuredly, I say to you, he who does not enter the sheepfold by the door, but climbs up some other way, the same is a thief and a robber.
1 John 1:9
If we confess our sins, He is faithful and just to forgive us our sins and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.
Ephesians 2:8-9
For by grace you have been saved through faith, and that not of yourselves; it is the gift of God, not of works, lest anyone should boast.
/page(85)

Chapter 6
Becoming Spiritual You Choose
When you receive the gift of salvation and Jesus comes into your heart, you then have the potential to become a spiritual person. You have a free will. You can choose to be controlled by your carnal nature, but you must choose to be controlled by the Lord Jesus if you want to live and mature in the Spirit.
When you are in the flesh (your carnal nature), you are lord. When you are in the Spirit (Christ’s nature), Jesus is Lord. You choose where you live. (For more details on the two natures, refer to Chapter 5 of My Sheep Hear My Voice.)
I have said this throughout my ministry and I say it again:
If you want to live in the Spirit, you must first deal with the issue of who is lord of your life. To be in the Spirit, you must stop being lord and let Jesus be your Lord.
If you believe you will reign with Christ in the millennial kingdom, know this: Jesus is Lord of the millennial kingdom. If you hope to spend eternity with God in His kingdom, know this: Jesus is Lord of eternity. Likewise, if you want to live in the kingdom of God now: Jesus is Lord of the spiritual kingdom.
Jesus is Lord of the millennial kingdom. Jesus is Lord of eternity.
Jesus is Lord of the spiritual kingdom NOW.
/page(86)

Why would you resist Him being your Lord now simply because you have a choice at this time? In the future, there will be no choice. He is Lord and this must be settled now if you want to be a spiritual person and enjoy His kingdom while here on earth.
Being a Witness
There is a difference between moving into the Spirit and abiding in the Spirit. Acts 17:28 says, “For in Him we live and move and have our being, as also some of your own poets have said, ‘For we are also His offspring.’ ” It is more difficult to stay in the Spirit in a rapidly changing, pressure situation than in a controlled environment.
There are reasons why it is more difficult to stay in the Spirit when you are in a pressure situation. The process of identifying and removing these reasons is part of growing up spiritually. You start by learning to stay in the Spirit in your personal space without having to do anything. From this place of safety, the Holy Spirit will teach you how to live and operate in the Spirit in more challenging circumstances. (See Chapter 12.)
Acts 1:8 says, “But you shall receive power when the Holy Spirit has come upon you; and you shall be witnesses to Me in Jerusalem, and in all Judea and Samaria, and to the end of the earth.” Most Christians view the empowering of the Holy Spirit as a way to do something, but this scripture says you are given power to be a witness. The Spirit in you changes who you are as well as what you do. In fact, one of the main purposes of the power of the Spirit is to subdue your flesh. Flesh will not subdue flesh. You need the power of the Spirit to bring your flesh under subjection.
You have a free will. If you yield to the Spirit, He will manifest in power to bring your carnal nature under control. But if you stay in your carnal nature and try to bring your flesh
/page(87)

under control, you will fail every time. It is a way that seems right. When you decide to obey God, the Spirit will manifest in power to subdue your flesh.
To be a witness, there must be fruit of the Spirit evident in you. This fruit is only produced by abiding in the Vine (John 15:1-8). The Spirit’s power was given to provide you with the ability to abide in Him. It was given so you can move into the Spirit and also stay there.
The Spirit will show you where satan has access to keep you in the flesh. Then He will manifest in power, as you repent of the access, to give you victory over satan. He will show you how to live in obedience to Christ.
What you are speaks much louder than what you say.
If the fruit of your life does not match what you say, people will not believe you are what you say you are. But if there is fruit, they can taste and see that God is good (Psalm 34:8). This is the strongest witness of all.
In the beginning of your spiritual walk, you must learn to abide in the Spirit without having to do anything. If you try to do things in the Spirit before you learn to simply be in the Spirit, you will fail every time because your spiritual foundation has not been properly laid. As you abide in the Spirit, you learn to rest in a spiritually controlled environment. It is in this place that you develop sensitivity to the Spirit and learn to be comfortable with Him ministering to you and giving you simple instructions. He will show you how to grow up spiritually. It is important to rest in Him as a baby Christian, because this is your safe place. The devil has no access to you when you are in the Spirit.
When you are in the Spirit, satan has no access to you.
/page(88)

satan’s Objective
The devil’s #1 objective is to move you out and keep you out of the Spirit. He will rob from you and bring destruction into your life in every way he can. John 10:10 says, “The thief does not come except to steal, and to kill, and to destroy. I have come that they may have life, and that they may have it more abundantly.”
satan uses lies to convince you that you must constantly “do things” to stay in the Spirit. Remember: He is a liar! Being in the Spirit is a place of rest, a place you can abide without having to do anything. When you do religious acts or good works to try to earn this place of rest, you actually hinder your spiritual progress.
Ask the Lord to show you the truth about where you are. If you struggle in your spiritual life and feel like you work hard to please the Lord yet do not enjoy consistent fellowship with Him, it is very likely you are doing good works to produce a relationship with Him. Ask the Lord to show you any works you do that He is not authorizing or requiring you to do. Such works do not move you closer to the Lord; in fact, they interfere with your fellowship with Him.
An Example of Abiding
A natural example of this spiritual place of rest and abiding would be in my home with my wife, Shirley. When she and I are in correct spiritual order with each other, our spirits are unified. We are in one mind, one place and one accord. This creates a peaceful environment in our home that is comfortable and restful. This principle is true even if we are not in the same room.
If either or both of us move into the flesh, it breaks the unity between us and the atmosphere is no longer restful. The atmosphere changes if we are not in spiritual unity. When
/page(89)

whoever is in the flesh repents and makes things right with the Lord, we are reunited in the Spirit. The atmosphere changes back to peace.
If anything interferes with the fellowship I have with my wife, one of us has already broken fellowship with the Lord. If one or both of us get out of the Spirit, satan gets access. When we are in unity, we have peacefulness in our home. We are connected in the Spirit whether we are physically together or not.
Your Responsibility
One of satan’s traps is to entice you to communicate with each other to correct a negative situation before you are in right standing with the Lord. This is important because as long as you are out of the Spirit, satan has access. The enemy will bring thoughts of judgment toward the other person to keep you from focusing on your own sin. Then the problem escalates.
It is important to take responsibility for yourself and be honest about where you are in relationship with the Lord. This releases the other person to Him. Then it is easy to be reconciled.
The same is true in the spiritual realm. If you try to fix your relationship with God by doing a good work from the flesh, it never works. Instead, go back to the first work of repentance. When you move back into the Spirit, the Lord will show you what you did wrong and how to fix the problem. Ask Him to show you every part of what you did wrong, why you were wrong (motive), and what He would have wanted you to do instead. Ask Him to provide you with a similar opportunity so you can respond with obedience instead of reacting in the flesh.
/page(90)

One More Time!
If you believe you have to do something to move into or stay in the Spirit, you are deceived. The majority of the time, the thing that moves you out of the Spirit is something you did (often a good work) that you should not have done. The ability to move into the Spirit and stay there is part of the gift of eternal life and salvation. It only comes by grace through faith. Any work you try to do disqualifies you from having the very thing you want.
Remember what you did to enter into God’s presence when you first got saved. You repented of your sins, turned your heart to God, and believed He would do what He promised. If you realize you have moved out of His presence, it is because of sin and unbelief. You can come right back into His presence. As long as you believe you have to do something, you disqualify yourself. God made it simple, so do not complicate it.
Ask the Lord if you fall for this satanic trick: Are you “doing” rather than “being”?
Trust and Obey
When you are in the Spirit, Jesus is Lord. You are not responsible to do anything unless He directs you to do it. (Please stop and meditate on this!) When you are in His presence, you are in right standing with Him. You are instructed in Colossians 3:15 to let the peace of God rule in your heart. Peace is like a thermostat. As long as you have peace, relax and enjoy the atmosphere. If you sense your peace is disturbed, do not try to determine what is wrong from your natural mind. Simply ask the Lord if there is something you
/page(91)

should or should not do. Instructions should flow easily from the Holy Spirit.
Sometimes God will disturb your peace to get your attention because He wants you to do something or stop doing something. Simply acknowledge the Lord for a direction. Whatever He tells you, He has authorized you to do. The anointing is God’s authorization to obey what He commands. The Spirit on you will enable you to accomplish whatever God authorizes. It is God’s responsibility to provide whatever you need to obey Him.
Do not use your reasoning and understanding to judge whether or not you can obey God’s command or have the provisions necessary to obey it. All you need to do is believe you can do whatever God tells you. It is God’s responsibility, not yours, to provide whatever you need.
Your responsibility is to seek the Lord for directions and expect Him to provide whatever you need. It is like the old Gospel song that says, “Trust and obey. For there’s no other way to be happy in Jesus, but to trust and obey.” It really is that simple.
There’s no other way to be happy in Jesus, but to trust and obey.
Trust and obey. These are simple instructions that work. You are only required to do these two things. Your job is to obey when God directs and trust Him instead of yourself. No one can make this choice for you! The Spirit knows if you really make the choice. It starts with a decision but then many steps must be taken for it to be accomplished.
The devil will try to stop you from trusting God. As I have said repeatedly, satan loves to substitute religious works for loving obedience. You have to expose his lies, take your faith back and release it into God.
You are only required to obey at the level you are capable of doing. As long as the Spirit is in charge, He knows
/page(92)

all of the steps that must be taken along the path. God always looks at your heart. Are you trusting Him or not?
Choose to trust God instead of yourself.
Because the words of this song are so meaningful, I am including them in this book. I suggest you spend quality time before the Lord, meditating on the truths in this hymn.
Trust and Obey
When we walk with the Lord, in the light of His Word, What a glory He sheds on our way.
While we do His good will, He abides with us still, And with all who will trust and obey.
Not a shadow can rise, not a cloud in the skies, But His smile quickly drives it away.
Not a doubt or a fear, not a sigh or a tear,
Can abide while we trust and obey.
Not a burden we bear, not a sorrow we share, But our toil He doth richly repay.
Not a grief or a loss, not a frown or a cross, But is blessed if we trust and obey.
But we never can prove, the delights of His love, Until all on the altar we lay,
For the favor He shows, for the joy He bestows, Are for those who will trust and obey.
Then in fellowship sweet, we will sit at His feet,
Or we’ll walk by His side in the way.
What He says we will do, where He sends we will go. Never fear, only trust and obey.
/page(93)

Chorus:
Trust and obey. For there’s no other way, To be happy in Jesus, but to trust and obey.
(By Daniel Towner and John Sammis, 1887.)
Embrace Conviction
As I have said before, most of your early instructions from God will be simply to repent and deal with the accesses satan has that move you out of the Spirit. This includes things you believe or do that are unlawful. It also includes things you are not doing that God wants you to do.
Once you have dealt with most of the obvious things you are doing wrong, the Holy Spirit will start exposing the things you do wrong that you think are right. This is critical because these are the areas in which you are deceived. These are the ways that seem right.
I cannot stress enough the importance of trusting the Lord as He exposes areas you have been convinced are correct yet are actually deception and disobedience. Only the Spirit can reveal these areas, but dealing with them will produce enormous growth and rapid change. So embrace this work!
There will be a lot of conviction in the early stages of walking with God, but this is a blessing. Hebrews 12:6 says, “For whom the LORD loves He chastens, And scourges every son whom He receives.” Your Father does not want any sin to separate you from fellowship with Him. Yes, it is true that chastening and correction do not feel good at the time. Hebrews 12:11 says, “Now no chastening seems to be joyful for the present, but painful; nevertheless, afterward it yields the peaceable fruit of righteousness to those who have been trained by it.”
/page(94)

Let me stop a moment to make this statement. Conviction is one of the most important gifts you receive from God. Conviction and repentance allow you to come into the presence of your Father. If you do not see this as a gift, you must look at your heart. Do you get offended or hurt when you are convicted? If you do, your flesh is reacting rather than your spirit. Your eternal spirit loves to be in fellowship with God. You need to examine how you react when you are convicted. Your reaction shows whether you are in the flesh or the Spirit.
Remember: Conviction is a labor of love because God wants you to abide with Him consistently in a safe place where you can grow up and become a mature child. He longs for you to fulfill your purpose on earth and then rule and reign throughout eternity in the highest position available for you.
Your qualification for greater things in God’s kingdom is not based on doing works you think have value. It is based solely on you doing the work God has assigned to you. It does not matter how simple you might judge a particular work to be. You will be judged by your faithfulness to serve God and obey Him because you love Him.
Let me say this again! Whatever spiritual increase you enjoy is based on the work God does in and through you, not what you do from your natural abilities. God promises that if you are faithful in the small things, He will make you a ruler over greater things (Matthew 25:21).
You do not have to be in a high position of authority in the natural world to be in a high position of authority in the eternal kingdom. This is determined by your faithfulness and the responsibilities God gives you on earth. Embrace whatever God directs you to do. Do it heartily as unto the Lord, simply because you love Him (Colossians 3:23). Be faithful and you will be blessed.
Embrace whatever God directs you to do, regardless of how simple it seems.
/page(95)

You are only responsible to do what God tells you to do. Do not waste time looking at others’ callings or responsibilities. You will be judged on your faithfulness to do what God tells you to do, not what He tells someone else to do. Avoiding comparisons with others will free you from judgment (which is sin). It will also free you from self- exaltation or condemnation (which is also sin). Do not let satan divert you from God’s directions by tempting you to focus on others.
/page(96)

Assignment
Ask the Lord for directions in things He knows you are capable of obeying now. Then obey Him because you love Him. This will start building your confidence. As you obey, the sowing and reaping principle will begin to manifest in you. Galatians 6:7b says, “...for whatever a man sows, that he will also reap.” As your love and obedience grow, love will be multiplied back to you. God’s love and grace will then enable you to obey more difficult commandments.
Ask the Lord to show you how you respond to conviction. Do you embrace it in some situations but resist or get offended in others? You may find that you are unwilling to repent in certain areas. Ask Him to show you details about why you respond the way you do. List the revelations you receive from the Spirit in your notebook.
/page(97)

Reference Verses for Chapter 6
Acts 17:28
For in Him we live and move and have our being, as also some of your own poets have said, “For we are also His offspring.”
Acts 1:8
But you shall receive power when the Holy Spirit has come upon you; and you shall be witnesses to Me in Jerusalem, and in all Judea and Samaria, and to the end of the earth.
John 15:1-8
I am the true vine, and My Father is the vinedresser. Every branch in Me that does not bear fruit He takes away; and every branch that bears fruit He prunes, that it may bear more fruit. You are already clean because of the word which I have spoken to you. Abide in Me, and I in you. As the branch cannot bear fruit of itself, unless it abides in the vine, neither can you, unless you abide in Me. I am the vine, you are the branches. He who abides in Me, and I in him, bears much fruit; for without Me you can do nothing. If anyone does not abide in Me, he is cast out as a branch and is withered; and they gather them and throw them into the fire, and they are burned. If you abide in Me, and My words abide in you, you will ask what you desire, and it shall be done for you. By this My Father is glorified, that you bear much fruit; so you will be My
disciples.
Psalm 34:8
Oh, taste and see that the LORD is good; Blessed is the man who trusts in Him!
John 10:10
The thief does not come except to steal, and to kill, and to destroy. I have come that they may have life, and that they may have it more abundantly.
/page(98)

Colossians 3:15
And let the peace of God rule in your hearts, to which also you were called in one body; and be thankful.
Hebrews 12:6
For whom the LORD loves He chastens, And scourges every son whom He receives.
Hebrews 12:11
Now no chastening seems to be joyful for the present, but painful; nevertheless, afterward it yields the peaceable fruit of righteousness to those who have been trained by it.
Matthew 25:21
His lord said to him, “Well done, good and faithful servant; you were faithful over a few things, I will make you ruler over many things. Enter into the joy of your lord.”
Colossians 3:23
And whatever you do, do it heartily, as to the Lord and not to men.
Galatians 6:7b
“...for whatever a man sows, that he will also reap.
/page(99)

Conviction
Chapter 7
True Repentance
 You will never grow spiritually if you do not learn to embrace conviction. Conviction basically means, “to be convinced.” It is the Holy Spirit’s job to convince you of sin. Whether you are reading the Word, hearing a sermon, or the Holy Spirit is speaking directly to you, it is the Spirit’s responsibility to convict you. This includes sins of omission and commission: things you are not doing that you should be doing and things you are doing that you should not be doing.
When the Spirit convicts you, you lose your peace. Godly sorrow becomes evident as the Spirit grieves in you. 2 Corinthians 7:10 says, “For godly sorrow produces repentance leading to salvation, not to be regretted; but the sorrow of the world produces death.” The purpose of godly sorrow is to lead you to repentance. Once you are convicted by the Spirit, confess your sin to God and ask for His forgiveness. You must take full responsibility for what you did or did not do.
1 John 1:9 (KJV) says, “If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.” This is the first step in being restored to fellowship with God. However, if you never go farther than confession, you will only receive forgiveness for the fruit that manifested.
Confession alone will not deal with the root of sin.
Inevitably, you will produce the same fruit again if you do not 100

deal with the root. Godly sorrow is intended to bring you to repentance which means, “a change of mind, as it appears to one who repents, of a purpose he has formed or of something he has done” (Strong’s Greek #3341). The definition of repentance also means, “...reversal of ... decision” (Strong’s Greek #3340). In other words, when you truly repent, you turn around and go the opposite direction.
The Taproot of All Sin
The taproot of all sin is taking over lordship. Your lordship produces all types of sin. This includes obvious sins as well as ways that seem right (works that appear good but are not done at God’s direction).
Anytime you are convicted about a particular sin, you should seek the Lord about where the sin came from. The Spirit will show you how you took over lordship and the steps you took before ungodly fruit manifested. Dealing with the root issue of lordship is the only way to truly repent and overcome sin. (See Chapter 9.) It is also important to note that the “trunk” which grows from the root of your lordship always includes selfishness.
Romans 8:3 says, “For what the law could not do in that it was weak through the flesh, God did by sending His own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, on account of sin: He condemned sin in the flesh.” Your carnal nature has been corrupted by sin. When you were born again, you were given a new nature and were instructed to bury the old nature. From that point on, you are commanded to yield to the Lord alone.
As long as you follow the simple instructions to stay in the Spirit and acknowledge the Lord, you cannot sin. The moment you become lord and direct your own steps, you move back into the carnal nature. Everything you do from that point is sin. Every step you direct as lord is sin, whether it is a good thing or an evil thing.
/page(101)

You need to repent of whatever sin is manifesting in your life, but the most important thing you need to repent of is being your own lord. This will move you back into the new nature where you are yielded to Jesus. In the old nature (you are lord), everything you do is sin. In the new nature (Jesus is Lord), everything you do is righteous. You are the one who makes the decision. You and only you will answer to God for your choice. Be wise and make the right choice!
Your Responsibility
Regardless of what someone else does, you are responsible for your sin. A common trick of satan is to entice you to focus on someone else’s faults or sins. When someone sins against you, you judge them as being wrong rather than repenting of your sin. Your judgment may be correct but you are not authorized to be anyone’s judge. Matthew 7:1 says, “Judge not, that you be not judged.” Judging others is a reaction from the flesh, not the Spirit. Jesus is the only authorized Judge!
You are responsible for your sin.
The devil often ministers to both people in a conflict situation, causing both of them to move into judgment and sin. You need to become wise and not fall for this ploy. You are never authorized to judge another person, regardless of what they may do to you. Immediately give the situation to the Lord because He is the only authorized Judge. Your responsibility is to act as the Spirit directs instead of reacting from the flesh.
Important reminder: If you have reacted in the flesh to someone who has wronged you, stop talking! The more you talk, the more your flesh will manifest. Even if you cannot get out of the situation at the moment, do not make it worse. Let it
/page(102)

go! Later, when you have had time to repent and move back in the Spirit, you will be able to hear the Lord tell you what to do to remedy the circumstances.
True Repentance
When you confess, you admit you are wrong and seek forgiveness. When you repent, you turn from what you were doing and do the opposite instead. If this is done consistently, your fruit will confirm you no longer do what you did before. True repentance always produces godly fruit. Repentance yields victory that produces behavior changes. If you find yourself repeatedly confessing the same sin you continue to commit, you have not truly repented.
If you continue to commit the same sin, you have not truly repented.
When the Spirit convicts you of manifesting bad fruit (sin), you must first be forgiven so you can move back into God’s presence. Then you need to seek the Holy Spirit as your Teacher to show you the reasons why the bad fruit manifested. In other words, you need revelation about the source of your sin. Then you can repent of the steps you took on the pathway from the root of your sin (taking over lordship) to the bad fruit that manifested.
The path that leads to the manifestation of bad fruit may include judgment, selfishness, hurt and offense, anger, lust and many other sins. Ask the Lord why bad fruit manifested. Then, as you trace the pathway back to the root of taking over lordship, continue to ask the Lord about each step.
Repentance at the root level mortifies your old behaviors of the flesh and produces new, godly attitudes and behavior. Remember, the taproot of all sin is taking over
/page(103)

lordship from Jesus Christ. (Details on the root and fruits of your lordship vs. Jesus’ Lordship can be found in Chapter 5 in My Sheep Hear My Voice. I suggest you spend time studying the comparison between the tree of the knowledge of good and evil and the tree of life as illustrated in this chapter.)
After a season, your fruit will prove whether or not you did this process correctly and in enough detail. If godly fruit is not produced, go through the process again. As the Holy Spirit convicts you of sin, He also teaches you how to repent. Each new truth that is properly processed brings spiritual growth. The more you repent, the more you become like Christ and the less access satan has to you. To a deeper measure, the old nature dies. The Father does this work through the Spirit to prepare you to be the Bride for His Son.
Where Do You Start?
It does not matter how long you have walked with God. If you are not making spiritual progress and are not deepening your relationship with the Lord, you must go back and do the first works over again. If you are not where you would like to be spiritually and you are not enjoying your walk with Jesus, embrace the truths in this book! Its truths are especially for those who have known God for a time (possibly a long time) but realize they are struggling or even failing in their Christian walk. You have to go back to the simple instructions about how to have a relationship with God and deepen your fellowship with Him.
You start walking in the Spirit by repenting, humbling yourself, releasing your faith into God, and seeking Him. Make the decision to yield yourself to Jesus as your Lord and Savior. The lack of yielding to the Lord is the taproot of your problems! Even if you have done this many times before, do it again. Continually press toward the goal of trusting the Lord with all of your heart. Accept where you are.
/page(104)

God does! There is grace for where you are but there is not grace to stay where you are.
Not yielding to the Lord
is the taproot of all of your problems!
Old things passing away and all things becoming new must be a way of life you accept and embrace. Your carnal way of directing your life, whether you choose to do good or evil, must pass away. Spiritual growth can only happen when this process takes place consistently.
Developing Love and Obedience
The most important phase of your spiritual life takes place between the time you are born again and the beginning of spiritual preschool. During this time, developing your love for and your trust in God should be your first priority. It is during this phase that you may find yourself convicted about many things. Do not get discouraged! God is doing a good work in you. He desires to remove every sin and hindrance that separates you from Him.
When any need arises in your life, God should be the first one you turn to. Everything you need will be added, in God’s timing, as your relationship with Him deepens and grows. God has a plan for your life, and He knows how to put it in place so you grow into a mature Christian.
The Holy Spirit will comfort you. He will protect and teach you. He will provide everything you need to grow spiritually. The Father will continually motivate you as you seek Him.
Do not get overwhelmed when the Holy Spirit continually shows you things that are wrong in your life. He is not doing this to make you feel bad. He is revealing your sins because
/page(105)

they are hindrances to your walk with God. Every time you are convicted and repent, you remove another reason why your walk with God is not as it should be. The more you repent, the more consistent your fellowship with the Father will be. You should rejoice when you are convicted. It is a gift from God!
You may be shocked to find out you are wrong when you thought you were right. God already knows everything about the sins He is exposing, as well as all of the other sins you do not know about. He still loves you.
Do not let satan interpret the conviction you are feeling as God being angry with you. Conviction is not punishment. It is a gift from God and a tremendous blessing. It is merely an alarm to alert you to a problem. Sufficient grace is always available to cleanse you as well as change you into the image of Christ.
God knows every detail about all of your sins and He still loves you!
/page(106)

Assignment
Spending quality time in the presence of God should be your top priority. Seek the Holy Spirit and the Word for revelation. When truth comes and you are convicted, focus on walking out your repentance as quickly as possible. (Remember: Each time you are convicted, add a page to your notebook with the date.)
Do not neglect this work. The enemy will provide many seemingly good excuses for procrastinating. If the Spirit convicts you, then He also provides the grace and instructions to completely repent. Whatever the Holy Spirit convicts you about should be repented of immediately. Nothing else should have priority. Make this a daily practice!
/page(107)

Reference Verses for Chapter 7
2 Corinthians 7:10
For godly sorrow produces repentance leading to salvation, not to be regretted; but the sorrow of the world produces death.
1 John 1:9 (KJV)
If we confess our sins, He is faithful and just to forgive us our sins and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.
Romans 8:3
For what the law could not do in that it was weak through the flesh, God did by sending His own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, on account of sin: He condemned sin in the flesh.
Matthew 7:1
Judge not, that you be not judged.
/page(108)



Chapter 8
First Love
 1 John 4:19 says, “We love Him because He first loved us.” It is impossible to love God until you have first been loved by Him. You can only express love to God with pure agape love, which originates from Him. Agape love is defined as, “to love (in a social or moral sense): -(be-)love(-ed)...to welcome, to entertain, to be fond of, to love dearly” (Strong’s Greek #25).
Natural love has selfishness mixed with it. No one was born with godly love resident in their hearts. But when you humbled yourself, repented, and opened your heart to God, He poured His love into you. God manifests His love in you to the level you open your heart to Him. Also, you can only respond with love to the measure that you have received.
God desires us to love and trust Him with our whole hearts so He can pour more love into us. The manifestation of His love in our hearts enables us to love Him more through our obedience. John 14:15 says, “If you love Me, keep My commandments.” Our love is expressed through obedience.
This may not make sense to your natural mind, but it is a specific instruction from the Lord. If you want to show Him your love for Him, you must obey what He tells you to do. The more you obey God, the more you express love to Him. This is simple, yet many believers have stumbled over this truth their entire lives.
/page(109)

John 14:21-23 says, “He who has My commandments and keeps them, it is he who loves Me. And he who loves Me will be loved by My Father, and I will love him and manifest Myself to him...Jesus answered and said to him, ‘If anyone loves Me, he will keep My word; and My Father will love him, and We will come to him and make Our home with him.’ ” If you want to enjoy fellowship and intimacy with God, these scriptures explain what you must do. What a wondrous privilege you have been given to have the Father and Jesus make Their home in your heart simply because you obey from a heart of love!
Starting Out
In the beginning of your spiritual walk, your focus should be on learning to receive God’s love and enjoying His presence. Simply open your heart to Him. Confess your sins and repent if you need to. Let God manifest Himself to you in any way He chooses. Psalm 46:10 says, “Be still, and know that I am God; I will be exalted among the nations, I will be exalted in the earth!” In the hectic world we live in, we are comfortable being busy and doing as much as possible in an allotted amount of time. Carrying this mentality into your relationship with God will only cause frustration. You must practice being still before Him.
2 Corinthians 10:5 says, “Casting down arguments (KJV says imaginations) and every high thing that exalts itself against the knowledge of God, bringing every thought into captivity to the obedience of Christ.” It may take a few minutes to calm your mind, but it is well worth the effort. Ask the Lord to calm you as you bring every thought under His control.
It is important to pray a covering over yourself as you come before the Lord. The devil loves to fill your mind with things you think you should be doing or other distractions
/page(110)

to keep you from focusing your thoughts on the Lord. You must learn how to be still before God. As you practice this, you will learn how to be quiet and restful in your spirit even when you are busy doing what the Lord has told you to do.
Do not try to impress God. Let Him take the initiative. Purify your heart as you draw near to God and believe that He will draw near to you (James 4:8). If it does not seem God is drawing close to you, do not try to force the issue. If it is not working, ask the Holy Spirit to show you what is wrong so you can confess and repent.
Lack of fellowship with God is never His fault!
In Psalm 46:10 the word know basically means, “to know, learn to know, perceive, find out and discern, to know by experience” (Strong’s Hebrew #3045). While you are still before God, do not try to figure out how He will manifest to you. Maybe you will feel a flow of the Spirit in a particular physical manifestation such as goose bumps. You should begin to feel God’s peace and joy. Do not limit your faith with opinions about how God should manifest to you. Whatever happens, be content.
God may manifest Himself to you in different ways at different times. Learn to communicate from your heart without any words. Keep your thoughts focused on the Lord without making requests or expressing your desires. Let your heart and mind draw near to Him. Once again, keep it simple!
The First Works
When we are learning how to meet with God in an intimate way, we often miss Him altogether. The first works are always to humble yourself, repent of every sin and draw near to God. Whenever you need God, you always go back to these first works, regardless of how long you have
/page(111)

walked with Him or where you are spiritually. Walking with God always comes back to the foundation of a personal, intimate relationship with Him. (I keep repeating this because it is so crucial.)
It is here that satan will try to distract you with ways that seem right. As the father of lies, he will always supply you with a list of things you should or should not do instead of humbling yourself. God requires nothing more or less than focusing on loving and obeying Him. It is imperative to focus your mind and heart on this simple truth.
Remember Luke 18:17. “Assuredly, I say to you, whoever does not receive the kingdom of God as a little child will by no means enter it.” Come before your Father with the heart of a child, fully trusting in His love and mercy. Open your heart to Him and picture yourself being held safely in His arms. This is where He wants you to abide!
Your personal relationship with God qualifies you to be in His presence. You are His child, and it should be easy to come before Him. Do not let your religious reasoning take you out of God’s presence. Trust your Father with all of your heart. Lean on God instead of trusting in your abilities. It does not matter how mature you are, you still need to remember you are a beloved child of your Father.
Love Equals Obedience
Remember John 14:15. Obeying the Lord shows Him you love Him. When you obey the Lord because you love Him, you activate the principle of sowing and reaping (Galatians 6:7). Whatever you sow into God through obedience, you will always reap back from Him in greater abundance. The more you obey God because you love and trust Him, the more His love can be manifested in your life. He will bless you with enough love that you will have abundance for yourself as well as others.
/page(112)

Start where you are. Do not try to obey beyond what you are capable of and then feel condemned for failing. You are only responsible to obey what God is speaking to you, not what you think you should do. Seek God for direction in things He knows you are capable of obeying. Obey because you love Him. When you do this, you sow love into God and you will always reap more love back from Him.
From this simple beginning your love relationship with your Lord will grow rapidly. You will be able to obey more difficult commands as God’s love increases in your heart. As your love grows, so will your ability to love the Lord through obedience. This will become a way of life.
The more difficult the commandment is, the more trust and love you will need to obey. God will not give you commands that are beyond your capacity to obey. Your flesh may lie to you and tell you that you cannot obey, but you can obey any commandment God gives you. This is why you must obey in the Spirit. Confirm that the commandments you are hearing actually come from God by using the three infallible witnesses of the Word of God (Jesus), the witness of the Holy Spirit, and the peace of God.
If God gives you a command and you fail while trying to obey, He does not condemn you and He is not angry with you. Consider this as part of your training and see it as another opportunity to remove more hindrances so you can grow. Then you can obey the commandment in the future without any problem.
/page(113)

Assignment
If you have had trouble obeying the Lord with a right motive (love), it is likely you do not understand how much He loves you. Ask the Holy Spirit to show you specific ways God has manifested His love to you in recent days and weeks as well as in the distant past. Ask Him to show you blessings He has given you that you have never been aware of.
Recognize that His gifts are given because He loves you so much. As God opens your eyes, make note of the blessings He has given you in a section of your notebook. If you are not enjoying those blessings as you should, list each hindrance the Holy Spirit reveals to you.
/page(114)

Reference Verses for Chapter 8
1 John 4:19
We love Him because He first loved us.
John 14:15
If you love Me, keep My commandments.
John 14:21-23
“He who has My commandments and keeps them, it is he who loves Me. And he who loves Me will be loved by My Father, and I will love him and manifest Myself to him.” Judas (not Iscariot) said to Him, “Lord, how is it that You will manifest Yourself to us, and not to the world?” Jesus answered and said to him, “If anyone loves Me, he will keep My word; and My Father will love him, and We will come to him and make Our home with him.”
Psalm 46:10
Be still, and know that I am God; I will be exalted among the nations, I will be exalted in the earth!
2 Corinthians 10:5
Casting down arguments and every high thing that exalts itself against the knowledge of God, bringing every thought into captivity to the obedience of Christ.
James 4:8
Draw near to God and He will draw near to you. Cleanse your hands, you sinners; and purify your hearts, you double- minded.
Luke 18:17
Assuredly, I say to you, whoever does not receive the kingdom of God as a little child will by no means enter it.
/page(115)

Galatians 6:7
Do not be deceived, God is not mocked; for whatever a man sows, that he will also reap.
/page(116)

Chapter 9
Who is Lord of Your Life?
Most Christians struggle with the Lordship issue their entire lives. However, this could and should have been settled at the beginning of your walk with God. I have said it before, and I am saying it again. If you have continued to resist Jesus’ Lordship, you must go back and do the first works over.
This is difficult for most Christians because they have used different methods throughout their lives. From their lordship, they have controlled their lives. They have been busy doing good works God never told them to do. They have developed religious habits that are hard to dismantle.
If you want to stop being religious and start being righteous, you must go back to the first works. It is a tremendous blessing to realize that you, in your natural man, know nothing and can do nothing to further your Christian life. Go back to where you started and admit where you actually are. 1 Corinthians 8:2 (KJV) says, “And if any man think that he knoweth any thing, he knoweth nothing yet as he ought to know.”
Stop trying to function at a false level of maturity. Stop “helping God” by doing good works from your natural mind. Isaiah 64:6 (KJV) says, “But we are all as an unclean thing, and all our righteousnesses are as filthy rags; and we all do fade as a leaf; and our iniquities, like the wind, have taken us away.”
If what you are doing, and what you have done for many years, has not produced deeper intimacy with God, it
/page(117)

is a work of your flesh. As hard as this is to face, it is time to lay down everything “spiritual” you have tried to accomplish in the flesh. You will find that a great burden is lifted when you simply humble yourself before the Lord, repent, and stop trying to earn God’s love by doing good works.
Be Honest before God
I ask you to stop right now and examine yourself. Ask the Holy Spirit if you are trying to complete the work He began in you with good works of the flesh. Galatians 3:3 (KJV) says, “Are ye so foolish? having begun in the Spirit, are ye now made perfect by the flesh?”
Do you believe this scripture? What you believe rules you. Look at what you do, what you think, and what you believe! Examine your fruit. If you are trying to complete your salvation from the flesh, go back to the beginning. Go back to your salvation. Humble yourself before your Father and repent for trying to do in the flesh what can only be done in the Spirit.
When you sin and leave the conscious presence of God, why do you believe you have to do good works to move back into His presence? This lie is one of satan’s snares. Repentance is the only way back into God’s presence.
All sin is condemned in the flesh (Romans 8:3). When you sin, you move from the Spirit to the flesh. Feeling condemned confirms you are not in the Spirit. You can become spiritual again when you decide to meet God’s conditions (confession and repentance). If you do not understand this and try to “fix” your sin from the natural man, you cannot move back into the Spirit.
/page(118)

Savior and Lord
It is an absolute travesty to only think of Jesus as your Savior. He is Savior and Lord. Jesus has the right to be your Lord by creation and redemption (1 Corinthians 6:19-20). He does not need your permission to be Lord. Whether or not you recognize or acknowledge this to be the truth, it is a fact. When you make the covenant with God at salvation, you get the whole package, not just what you are aware of. He never changes because He is already perfect and He always keeps His part of the covenant. This is the truth whether you believe it or not.
If the Lord says He will do a certain thing under specific circumstances, do not waste your time thinking He will do something different. Many Christians close their hearts to Jesus when He does not act the way they want Him to. They move away from Him and begin to seek after the flesh. In reality, they commit adultery against Him. When their lives fall apart, they want His forgiveness without submitting to Him as Lord.
Most believers only want Jesus to be their Savior. They do not want to obey Him and do not want to hear about His justice or judgment. Jesus has every right to be your Lord as well as your Savior, and this should have been settled at the very beginning! If it has not been dealt with, do not waste any more time ignoring this issue. Jesus has every right to be your Lord. It is a simple matter to humble yourself before Him and receive forgiveness.
Most believers try to explain away the issue of Lordship, but there is no excuse. They do not see the foolishness of their resistance. He is Lord. They want to reign with Him for eternity where He is Lord, but do not want Him to reign in their lives now.
/page(119)

Who is Your Lord?
Only one person can be in control of your life. It is either you or the Lord Jesus. There is no third choice. You must decide. The truth is not complicated. If you are controlling your life, you are lord because you are making the decisions. When you are lord, you are in the flesh. It is as simple as that. Even if you are a good lord, you are still in control and you are still in the flesh.
The other alternative is to humble yourself and let Jesus be Lord. When He is Lord, He makes the decisions. There is no neutral ground! You cannot live as if no one is in control. Either you are in control, which puts you in the flesh where satan has access, or Jesus is in control, which moves you into the Spirit.
Stop right now and ask the Lord this question: Who controls my life the majority of the time? You may be shocked by the answer. You may believe that Jesus is your Lord most of the time, but is this really true? You may also believe you are “neutral,” that even though Jesus is not your Lord, you are not either. Let me say it once again! There is no third choice and there is no neutral ground. If you do not choose Jesus as Lord, you are choosing yourself instead. If you want to enjoy a deeply intimate relationship with God, Jesus has to be your Lord all of the time.
If you do not choose Jesus as Lord, you are choosing yourself instead.
Establishing Lordship
Establishing the Lordship of Jesus Christ is absolutely critical if you want to have consistent fellowship with God and grow up spiritually. It is imperative to decide, once and for
/page(120)

all, that Jesus is your Lord rather than waiting to decide about individual situations. It is essential to have this attitude. Making this determination will affect everything else in your walk with God.
Decide that Jesus is your Lord once and for all instead of deciding about individual situations.
If you struggle with certain commands the Lord gives you, it is likely you have put boundaries on His Lordship. Perhaps you are willing to obey some of the time, but there are certain situations or requirements you hesitate to obey or even rebel against. If this is true in your life, you have set conditions (maybe even subconsciously) for your obedience. Perhaps there are areas where you do not trust the Lord with all of your heart. It is also possible there are areas of your flesh you are unwilling to mortify.
There may be a number of reasons why you have not chosen Jesus as your Lord in all things and at all times. If this is true, it is crucial to spend quality time with Him, seeking revelation about why you are unable to do this. He is more than willing to show you any hindrances that are keeping you from making this decision.
Have you set boundaries on Jesus’ Lordship? A Personal Testimony
I learned early in my spiritual walk that having a predetermination to obey the Lord is a major key for producing consistent fellowship with God. The majority of my personal success has been, and continues to be, based on this determination. At the beginning of my walk, I made the decision that Jesus was my Lord, absolutely and without
/page(121)

question, and I have maintained that decision for many years. I do not wait until I get a direction from God to decide whether or not I will obey Him. I simply obey.
A predetermination to obey the Lord is a crucial key to producing consistent fellowship with Him.
This single-mindedness established a standard of walking with God that I have maintained for over forty years. I chose to obey in simple things and difficult things. When I was required to obey hard commands, I found that God provided all of the grace I needed in each situation because I refused to make excuses for my flesh or my preferences. He knew I wanted to obey Him at every opportunity, and He responded by pouring love and grace into my heart when I faced challenging commandments. I have continued to do this, and His love and grace have been immeasurably multiplied to me many times over.
Ask the Lord!
Many Christians seek counsel from a pastor, pray, read the Bible or seek a direct word from God. Unfortunately, when it comes time to obey, they decide at that time whether or not they will obey. They may look for an easier command to obey. Sometimes their flesh rises up and they actually do the opposite of what God has told them to do. Then they make excuses for their disobedience.
If Jesus is your Lord, He is in control. This is the definition of Lordship! If He is in control, you are obligated to do what He tells you to do if you want to prove you love Him. Remember John 14:15. If you love Him, you will obey His commandments.
/page(122)

Obedience is the only thing that proves your love for God. If you cannot trust the Lord who saved you from hell, who can you trust? If you trust the Lord completely, you will choose to do whatever He commands simply because you love Him. It does not matter what it costs.
Obedience is the only thing that proves your love for God.
It is not wrong for you to ask a pastor or read the Word to confirm what God is saying to you, but the responsibility for getting direction for your life is yours. God will deal with you at your spiritual level. He does not expect you to be able to ask for a direction and hear a detailed answer if you are not to that level of maturity. However, He still requires you to seek Him for direction.
When you are young in the Lord, God can speak to your heart and direct you in many different ways other than direct dialogue. It is His responsibility to direct; it is your responsibility to seek and obey Him. His directions can come by having peace about something or having a thought that is accompanied by peace. God may speak to you directly through the Word or through a truth someone else is sharing. He is more than able to speak a personal word to you in a variety of ways.
God does not expect you to communicate as an adult if you are still a baby. While you are young in the Lord, He does not expect you to hear Him on every decision you make every day. There are many simple commandments in the Word you need to focus on obeying before you get concerned about direct commandments.
2 Timothy 2:15 says, “Be diligent to present yourself approved to God, a worker who does not need to be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth.” God expects you to obey this from the very beginning. You should study the Word and expect to learn from God. In fact, your main communication
/page(123)

begins with the Word of God.
When you are reading and studying the Word, ask the
Spirit to speak to you. It is His job to communicate with you. Communion does not require constant dialogue. You can be in God’s presence without having to say anything. As a baby, this is the first thing you should learn to do.
All of the things you repented of when you got saved were fruits of your lordship. Everything you do after you repent should be the fruits of His Lordship rather than yours. Remember: Jesus should also be the Lord of your repentance!
The new seeds God is sowing in you may take a season before producing fruit. Different fruits take different lengths of time to mature. Be patient and do not get discouraged. If you embrace conviction and repentance as blessings and begin to pursue them daily, you will quickly begin to see changes in your attitude and actions. The more quickly you repent, the sooner you will become like Jesus.
Excuses for Your Lordship
Our natural reasoning and methods of learning require us to be lord. Living in God’s kingdom requires Him to be Lord. The devil has access to us through human reasoning and education. He is the author of the world’s system of education, intellectual training and personal exaltation.
1 Corinthians 2:9-16 compares the difference between learning in the natural realm and learning in the spiritual realm. (This passage is quoted farther along in this chapter.) It is not easy to understand spiritual truths from the natural realm. It is impossible! The natural man cannot and will never be able to understand the things of God.
God is Spirit. His kingdom is Spirit, and it can only be understood in the Spirit. Only the Holy Spirit can reveal this kingdom to you. He lives in you. One of His jobs is to reveal
/page(124)

the things of God to those who love and obey Him (1 Corinthians 2:10). Jesus must be your Lord for this to happen.
Any reason you believe that gives you the right to be lord is a lie. Rebellion causes you to question God’s control. You may not want to admit you are rebellious, but as before, I ask you to look at your fruit.
If you judge God’s ways as irrelevant in today’s world, you are in the flesh. You may be holding on to your lordship because you are afraid of what will happen if Jesus is in control. Your trust may be hindered because God made a decision in your life that you did not think was fair. There can be many reasons why you are unwilling for Jesus to be the Lord of your life.
You must face how you truly feel and what you actually do. If your fruit indicates you are lord, then you are lord. Making excuses does not justify your lordship. Your motives and behavior must be examined, without an opinion, by the Word and the Holy Spirit.
A Common Excuse
The most common excuse I hear from intelligent or well- educated Christians for not submitting to the Lord is, “God gave me a brain and He expects me to use it.” This comes from the false assumption that when Jesus is Lord, you will not use your mind. The truth is, you will use your mind more than ever. The difference is you will use your mind to follow directions instead of making your own decisions.
God will use your mind to be trained and prepared in His kingdom. In fact, the use of your mind will actually be greatly expanded because you will have access to information in the kingdom of God. This is part of your heritage but you cannot enjoy your heritage if you live in the wrong kingdom.
Your natural mind is very limited because it cannot access God’s kingdom. Your intelligence and mental abilities are
/page(125)

miniscule compared to God’s. Isaiah 55:8-9 says, “ ‘For My thoughts are not your thoughts, Nor are your ways My ways,’ says the LORD. ‘For as the heavens are higher than the earth, So are My ways higher than your ways, And My thoughts than your thoughts.’ ”
Natural vs. Spiritual
Let me remind you one more time. You cannot be in control if you want to be spiritual. The natural and spiritual kingdoms are the opposite of one another. If you want to walk in and understand the things of God, you must live in the kingdom of God. You can only do this by humbling yourself before Him and submitting to Jesus as your Lord. (You may be tired of this being repeated, but it is a fact I do not want you to skim over or ignore.)
1 Corinthians 2:9-16 says, “But as it is written: ‘Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, Nor have entered into the heart of man The things which God has prepared for those who love Him.’ But God has revealed them to us through His Spirit. For the Spirit searches all things, yes, the deep things of God. For what man knows the things of a man except the spirit of the man which is in him? Even so no one knows the things of God except the Spirit of God. Now we have received, not the spirit of the world, but the Spirit who is from God, that we might know the things that have been freely given to us by God. These things we also speak, not in words which man’s wisdom teaches but which the Holy Spirit teaches, comparing spiritual things with spiritual. But the natural man does not receive the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness to him; nor can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned. But he who is spiritual judges all things, yet he himself is rightly judged by no one. For ‘who has known the mind of the LORD that he may instruct Him?’ But we have the mind of Christ.”
/page(126)

These scriptures explain the obvious differences between the natural realm and the spiritual realm. It is not necessary in the beginning for you to understand why they are different and what the differences are. The most important thing is to believe what God has said. Many Christians make the mistake of trying to understand these differences with their natural minds, but these scriptures plainly say the natural mind cannot understand the things of the Spirit.
One of satan’s favorite tactics is to entice you to reason things out with your mind. This is a way that seems right, and you will end up in confusion. Confusion proves your approach to God’s Word is done in a carnal, natural way where satan has access.
You may not understand these scriptures in the beginning. Start by accepting them as a fact. Remember what I have shared many times. What you believe rules you. Be careful about what you release your faith into. Release your faith into the truth of these scriptures. Walking in the Spirit is different from walking in the natural. It is the Holy Spirit’s job to reveal these differences to you. It is your job to abide in the Spirit so He can reveal them to you.
Faith and a Positive Attitude
Do you believe it is hard to live in the Spirit? If you do, it will be hard for you because that is what you believe. Release your faith into what God says. When you are in the Spirit, the yoke is easy and the burden is light (Matthew 11:30). Walking in the Spirit is only difficult if you do not know how to do it. God does not want you to be ignorant of His ways. Let the Holy Spirit teach you. Then it will be easy.
It is important to start with a positive attitude. My attitude was simple. Walking with God seemed hard, but it was only hard because I did not know how to do it yet. This is why you and I have the Holy Spirit as our Teacher. If you
/page(127)

listen to the Teacher and do what He says, it will be simple. It is a process but it has to start with the right attitude.
I release my faith that I can do anything God tells me to do, regardless of how important or impossible it may seem at the moment. The Holy Spirit as my Teacher is authorized to reveal everything I need to know for it to become easy. I cannot receive the information I need from the Teacher if I am in the flesh. I have to constantly go to Him and process any mistakes I may have made.
You must learn to encourage yourself. God is on your side. He is not against you. Yes, He resists your flesh, but He resists it because He loves you. Living in the flesh hinders you from receiving the benefits of your inheritance. It is necessary for the Spirit to teach you how to change from a natural to a spiritual way of life. It is your job to study and yield to the training.
Final Reminders
It is the Spirit’s job to teach you all things. John 14:26 says, “But the Helper, the Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in My name, He will teach you all things, and bring to your remembrance all things that I said to you.” At the same time, it is satan’s job to keep you ignorant of how God operates and what He wants to do in your life. (The devil also wants you to be ignorant of his deceptive devices.) Ask yourself who is in control of how you live. The one you obey is your lord.
Your motive for submitting to Jesus Christ as your Lord should be because you love Him and want to live in communion with Him. (Remember that sin and your lordship separate you from His conscious presence.) If you continue to struggle with Jesus’ Lordship, examine your motives for submitting to Him. If your motive is not love, your relationship with God will never work as it should.
/page(128)

In addition, you may have issues with trusting God. Ask the Lord if there are any hidden reasons why you do not trust Him. It may be that you simply have not chosen to trust Him. Trust is a decision, not a feeling.
Think of trusting God with all of your heart as giving Him the master key to every “room” in your heart and life. His master key overrides the individual keys for each room. If you have chosen to trust and obey Him without restriction, it should not be a problem for Him to have access to every part of your life. If you find you resist Him in a particular area, this confirms you have set boundaries for His Lordship.
/page(129)

Assignment
If you defend your right to be lord and resist Jesus’ Lordship, write down the excuses you have used to resist Him and examine each one in the Spirit. It is possible that you need to go back to your salvation experience. Perhaps your understanding of what Jesus did for you, and why He did it, is very shallow.
It is also possible that you have judged the Lord as being unfair in your life. Perhaps you are afraid of yielding to Him because you are not sure what He will require of you. These reasons (and there are many more) interfere with your ability to trust the Lord and completely submit to Him.
If you realize your resistance to Jesus’ Lordship has been obvious throughout your Christian life, it would be wise to divide your life into five year segments from the time you were born until you were saved, and then from salvation until now. Ask the Lord to show you events or decisions in each segment that have had an impact on the lordship issue or your ability to trust God. You could also do a timeline of your life in the same way. It is important to specify different events, decisions, and circumstances that continue to negatively affect your spiritual life.
You may not be able to fix everything by simply saying, “I’m sorry.” There may be reasons why you cannot stop doing wrong things. It is the Holy Spirit’s job to identify the reasons why you are unable to submit to Jesus as your Lord. You can trust Him completely.
Important note: If you have trouble hearing direct revelation from the Spirit, search the Scriptures for truth about the subjects the Teacher is working on. Ask Him to bear witness to your spirit if a specific verse is for you. If you are able to hear directly from the Spirit, you must still confirm each revelation with the Word of God. Direct revelation will never contradict the rightly divided Word. Every revelation must be confirmed by the three infallible witnesses.
/page(130)

Keep this process simple! Write down every revelation you receive with the date so you can monitor your progress. This way when it is done, it stays done. This process, when done correctly in the Spirit, causes old things to pass away and all things to become new (2 Corinthians 5:17).
The main reason it is important to do this is because it encourages you as you see progress being made. It will also keep you on track so satan cannot lead you in ways that seem right. If you are working on something that is not in your notebook, repent and go back to the Teacher. Only work on what the Spirit says to work on, nothing else.
The devil wants to distract you. He will tempt you to work on things that need to be dealt with but when it is the wrong time. Keep submitting to the work of the Spirit and only do what He commands you to do.
It is good to check back on these notes even when you have moved past them, because they contain the foundations needed for the next level. Be careful to maintain what you already have. You will stumble spiritually if you only focus on new revelations and neglect to maintain what you already have.
/page(131)

Reference Verses for Chapter 9
1 Corinthians 8:2 (KJV)
And if any man think that he knoweth any thing, he knoweth nothing yet as he ought to know.
Isaiah 64:6 (KJV)
But we are all as an unclean thing, and all our righteousnesses are as filthy rags; and we all do fade as a leaf; and our iniquities, like the wind, have taken us away.
Galatians 3:3 (KJV)
Are ye so foolish? having begun in the Spirit, are ye now made perfect by the flesh?
Romans 8:3
For what the law could not do in that it was weak through the flesh, God did by sending His own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, on account of sin: He condemned sin in the flesh.
1 Corinthians 6:19-20
Or do you not know that your body is the temple of the Holy Spirit who is in you, whom you have from God, and you are not your own? For you were bought at a price; therefore glorify God in your body and in your spirit, which are God’s.
John 14:15
If you love Me, keep My commandments.
2 Timothy 2:15
Be diligent to present yourself approved to God, a worker who does not need to be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth.
1 Corinthians 2:9-16
But as it is written; “Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, Nor
/page(132)

have entered into the heart of man, The things which God has prepared for those who love Him.” But God has revealed them to us through His Spirit. For the Spirit searches all things, yes, the deep things of God. For what man knows the things of a man except the spirit of the man which is in him? Even so no one knows the things of God except the Spirit of God. Now we have received, not the spirit of the world, but the Spirit who is from God, that we might know the things that have been freely given to us by God. These things we also speak, not in words which man’s wisdom teaches but which the Holy Spirit teaches, comparing spiritual things with spiritual. But the natural man does not receive the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness to him; nor can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned. But he who is spiritual judges all things, yet he himself is rightly judged by no one. For “who has known the mind of the LORD that he may instruct Him?” But we have the mind of Christ.
1 Corinthians 2:10
But God has revealed them to us through His Spirit. For the Spirit searches all things, yes, the deep things of God.
Isaiah 55:8-9
“For My thoughts are not your thoughts, Nor are your ways My ways”, says the LORD. “For as the heavens are higher than the earth, So are My ways higher than your ways, And My thoughts than your thoughts.”
Matthew 11:30
For My yoke is easy and My burden is light.
John 14:26
But the Helper, the Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in My name, He will teach you all things, and bring to your remembrance all things that I said to you.
/page(133)

2 Corinthians 5:17
Therefore, if anyone is in Christ, he is a new creation; old things have passed away; behold, all things have become new.
/page(134)

Chapter 10
The Beginning of Knowledge and Wisdom
The Fear of the Lord
The fear of the Lord is the beginning of knowledge and wisdom, but most believers never develop a healthy reverence for God. If they did, they would not be so foolish about what they do. A lack of the fear of the Lord is the number one reason why Christians struggle with Lordship.
A lack of the fear of the Lord
is the number one reason why Christians struggle with Lordship.
We have no idea how much grace is extended to us when we stand in rebellion and judge God because we evaluate His behavior. Such judgments are ridiculous. Who are we to judge God? Who are we to question His choices? He is the Almighty, yet we sometimes treat Him as if He is irrelevant. Exodus 20:3 and Deuteronomy 5:7 say, “You shall have no other gods before Me,” yet we do it every day. We serve the gods of our flesh and the world. We serve religion instead of our Heavenly Father. What an abomination!
Proverbs 1:7a says, “The fear of the LORD is the beginning of knowledge...” In this verse, knowledge is defined as, “knowledge; perception, skill, discernment, understanding, wisdom” (Strong’s Hebrew #1847). We need the knowledge
/page(135)

that is from God, but what is the starting point? The fear of the Lord is the beginning. It is not the middle or the end. The fear of the Lord is where you have to start. If you have no fear of God, you have no knowledge of Him or His kingdom.
Most believers have knowledge in the natural realm and they examine spiritual things from their carnal minds. They do not understand God’s kingdom. Only to the measure that you have a reverent fear of the Lord do you have knowledge of spiritual things.
The definition of fear is, “to fear, revere, be afraid; to stand in awe of, be awed, reverence, honour, respect” (Strong’s Hebrew #3372). Most identify the fear of God as reverence, as opposed to satanic fear. Yes, the fear of the Lord includes reverence for who He is. Acts 9:31 (KJV) says, “Then had the churches rest throughout all Judaea and Galilee and Samaria, and were edified; and walking in the fear of the Lord, and in the comfort of the Holy Ghost, were multiplied.” The definition of fear in this verse is, “fear, dread, terror, that which strikes terror” (Strong’s Greek #5401).
Sadly, today’s Christians dilute this definition. They do not recognize the necessity to fear God Almighty. If God chooses to do something, there is nothing you can do to stop Him. Your very breath and life are by His grace. If you think you can judge and resist God without consequences, you are foolish.
Proverbs 9:10 says, “The fear of the LORD is the beginning of wisdom, And the knowledge of the Holy One is understanding.” In this verse, wisdom is defined as, “wisdom, skill (in war), wisdom (in administration), shrewdness, prudence (in religious affairs), wisdom (ethical and religious)” (Strong’s Hebrew #2451). Knowledge and wisdom begin with the fear of the Lord. This is not natural knowledge, but knowledge of that which is holy.
Jeremiah 9:23-24 says, “Thus says the LORD: ‘Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, Let not the mighty man glory in his might, Nor let the rich man glory in his riches; But
/page(136)

let him who glories glory in this, That he understands and knows Me, That I am the LORD, exercising lovingkindness, judgment, and righteousness in the earth. For in these I delight,’ says the LORD.” As God reveals His wisdom, you will start to understand His kingdom and how it works. What an exciting opportunity this is!
Godly knowledge and wisdom must be spiritually discerned. They cannot be discerned from the flesh! The Holy Spirit reveals wisdom as you obey His instructions.
The Goodness and Severity of God
You must be aware of God’s severity as well as His goodness (Romans 11:22). He is the righteous Judge and His judgments are always fair and just, even when you do not understand them in your natural mind. When you have an appropriate fear of God, it is not a problem for Him to be your Lord.
If Jesus is not your Lord, you are! Do you take over His job and think He will not resist you? If you do, you are deceived. He may extend grace to you, but He can also withdraw grace and allow you to reap the consequences of your foolishness. Do not put yourself in this dangerous place. Most Christians do not believe they will face judgment for their sins. They believe God’s grace will be extended forever, but Galatians 6:7 says you will reap what you sow.
Stop and think about this. What you believe rules you. Do you actually believe you reap the consequences of your actions? Or do you expect God to continually extend grace when you repeatedly resist Him? Examine the fruit in your life. What does it tell you?
You will reap what you sow. There are consequences for your actions.
/page(137)

Warnings about the Fear of the Lord
In Matthew 10:17-28, Jesus told the disciples not to take any thought about what they should say when they were brought before the elders. The elders had the authority to kill them, but Jesus told them in verse 28 (KJV), “And fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul: but rather fear him which is able to destroy both soul and body in hell.” I ask you: Do you have this kind of reverential fear of God? Do you fear Him more than someone who could kill your body?
Romans 11:16-22 says, “For if the firstfruit is holy, the lump is also holy; and if the root is holy, so are the branches. And if some of the branches were broken off, and you, being a wild olive tree, were grafted in among them, and with them became a partaker of the root and fatness of the olive tree, do not boast against the branches. But if you do boast, remember that you do not support the root, but the root supports you. You will say then, ‘Branches were broken off that I might be grafted in.’ Well said, Because of unbelief they were broken off, and you stand by faith. Do not be haughty, but fear. For if God did not spare the natural branches, He may not spare you either. Therefore consider the goodness and severity of God: on those who fell, severity; but toward you, goodness, if you continue in His goodness. Otherwise you also will be cut off.”
Though the first branches had been holy, they were broken off because of unbelief. We, the wild olive branches, could then be grafted into the olive tree. Because of unbelief, the original branches were removed. You and I were grafted in by faith, but we are warned not to think highly of ourselves, but to fear. If God did not spare the original branches, you must be aware that He might not spare you either. You are warned to behold the goodness and severity of God. On those who fell, His severity was made known. You have been given
/page(138)

goodness, if you continue in His goodness. You could also be cut off because of unbelief.
This may shock you. You may not even believe it, but it is the Word of God. I am not trying to be in conflict with your doctrine or your church’s doctrine but you cannot afford to ignore such explicit scriptures.
You need to understand who you are dealing with. God gave you a chance to be grafted into the olive tree because of His grace, but you are given a warning in these verses! You are in the olive tree if you continue in faith, trusting God that He is trustworthy. But I ask you this: Do you really trust God if you will not let Him be your Lord? The Word says He is trustworthy. Do you believe this? The condition for safely abiding in the olive tree is continuing to believe.
You are Accountable
Romans 14:10-12 says, “But why do you judge your brother? Or why do you show contempt for your brother? For we shall all stand before the judgment seat of Christ. For it is written: ‘As I live, says the LORD, Every knee shall bow to Me, And every tongue shall confess to God.’ So then each of us shall give account of himself to God.” 2 Corinthians 5:10 says, “For we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that each one may receive the things done in the body, according to what he has done, whether good or bad.”
These scriptures are contrary to many common doctrines that are taught today, but such obvious and simple scriptures cannot be ignored. When God says something, He means what He says and will do what He says. If God says something that is contrary to what you believe, you have to either adjust His Word or adjust your doctrine. I encourage you to change your doctrine so it agrees with God’s Word. To do anything else is foolish. The truth is that you will give an account before
/page(139)

the judgment seat of Christ. You are held accountable for the choices you make.
1 Corinthians 3:10-15 says, “According to the grace of God which was given to me, as a wise master builder I have laid the foundation, and another builds on it. But let each one take heed how he builds on it. For no other foundation can anyone lay than that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ. Now if anyone builds on this foundation with gold, silver, precious stones, wood, hay, straw, each one’s work will become clear; for the Day will declare it, because it will be revealed by fire; and the fire will test each one’s work, of what sort it is. If anyone’s work which he has built on it endures, he will receive a reward. If anyone’s work is burned, he will suffer loss; but he himself will be saved, yet so as through fire.”
You either build your foundation from the carnal nature or you yield to Jesus Christ to build what He wants. There is no other option. Every work you do will be tested by fire. A work is anything you expend energy to do. These scriptures are not about your salvation but whether or not your works have eternal value.
Matthew 6:19-20 says, “Do not lay up for yourselves treasures on earth, where moth and rust destroy and where thieves break in and steal; but lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust destroys and where thieves do not break in and steal.” What are these treasures and how will they manifest? While the Bible does not go into detail about this, Jesus shared in Luke 19:17 that if a steward is faithful in small things, the Lord will make him ruler over many cities.
Your faithfulness to God every day affects how you will rule. God has commanded you to lay up treasures in heaven. This should not be the reason you serve Him, but you should be aware that serving Him yields blessings here and in eternity. Hebrews 11:6 says, “But without faith it is impossible to please Him, for he who comes to God must believe that He is, and that He is a rewarder of those who diligently seek
/page(140)

Him.” There are blessings and rewards in this life and the next when you are faithful to God.
The devil is a thief. He knows there will be a test of fire. He knows what will cause you to fail. If he cannot tempt you with obvious evil, he will entrap you with ways that seem right. Either way, he has stolen your reward.
You will give an account before God. If you have repented of the sins you have committed, the blood of Jesus has cleansed you and removed your sins. However, if you have not repented, you will give an account before God. Be quick to repent!
If you confess your sins, God forgives you (1 John 1:9). Confession puts you in right standing with God, but you lose rewards when you are away from Him. Repentance does not necessarily remove the consequences of your sin. You will continue to suffer loss if you sow to the flesh time and time again.
Important Warnings in Scripture
Galatians 6:7-8 (KJV) says, “Be not deceived; God is not mocked: for whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap.” God does not change His standards. His law does not change just because you do not agree with it. It is a fact; you will reap whatever you sow. When you sow to the flesh (you are lord), you will reap death in some form. When you sow to the Spirit (Jesus is Lord), you will not only reap life, you will reap abundant life (John 10:10).
1 Peter 4:15-18 says, “But let none of you suffer as a murderer, a thief, an evildoer, or as a busybody in other people’s matters. Yet if anyone suffers as a Christian, let him not be ashamed, but let him glorify God in this matter. For the time has come for judgment to begin at the house of God; and if it begins with us first, what will be the end of those who do not obey the gospel of God? Now ‘If the righteous one is
/page(141)

scarcely saved, Where will the ungodly and the sinner appear?’ ”
Most Christians do not believe this scripture. They refuse to acknowledge that God has every right to judge His people. If it is true that we are in the last days (and most believe we are), we should realize God’s judgment on the earth is coming quickly. But before that, God will judge His house. God’s love and correction give us an opportunity to repent. He convicts His children because He loves them so much. Correction from your Father gives you the opportunity to remove judgments from your record before you give an account at the final judgment.
Ephesians 4:30 warns us with these words: “And do not grieve the Holy Spirit of God, by whom you were sealed for the day of redemption.” This scripture is a commandment, not a suggestion. The fear of the Lord will keep you from grieving the Spirit. Every time you usurp authority over the Lord, you grieve the Spirit. (You cannot sin until you first take over authority and become lord.) When you listen to your flesh and the enemy, you grieve the Spirit.
“Nevertheless the solid foundation of God stands, having this seal: ‘The Lord knows those who are His,’ and, ‘Let everyone who names the name of Christ depart from iniquity’ ” (2 Timothy 2:19). Jesus is in the process of renewing your life. He wants you to receive every possible blessing in this life and throughout eternity.
The Lord’s work is to prepare you to be part of His Bride. When you resist this work, you grieve the Spirit. If the spots on your garment are not dealt with, there are consequences. Yielding to the flesh pollutes you and is, in fact, committing adultery against your Bridegroom, Jesus.
In this “age of grace,” many believers are deceived in thinking there are no consequences for sin. The Word is absolute, and God’s standards do not change. Galatians 6:8 says, “For he who sows to his flesh will of the flesh reap corruption, but he who sows to the Spirit will of the Spirit reap
/page(142)

everlasting life.” Corruption is defined as, “decay, i.e. ruin (spontaneous or inflicted, literally or figuratively):--corruption, destroy, perish” (Strong’s Greek #5356).
Ephesians 5:25-27 says, “Husbands, love your wives, just as Christ also loved the church and gave Himself for her, that He might sanctify and cleanse her with the washing of water by the word, that He might present her to Himself a glorious church, not having spot or wrinkle or any such thing, but that she should be holy and without blemish.” Do not be surprised when the Lord corrects you. He is preparing you to be His Bride.
There are multiple benefits in this life and in eternity for meeting God’s standards. In the same way, there are consequences for not meeting God’s standards. Be wise and accept what the Word says. It is foolish to ignore obvious warnings in the Word of God. Remember: Do not adjust the Word to confirm your doctrine. Adjust your doctrine to agree with the Word!
Matthew 7:13-14 says, “Enter by the narrow gate; for wide is the gate and broad is the way that leads to destruction, and there are many who go in by it. Because narrow is the gate and difficult is the way that leads to life, and there are few who find it.”
Luke 13:24-27 tells us to strive to enter through the narrow gate. Many will not be able to enter in. In fact, verse 27 says, “But He will say, ‘I tell you I do not know you, where you are from. Depart from Me, all you workers of iniquity.’ ” It is obvious from these scriptures that refusing to enter into the narrow way and continuing in iniquity have grave consequences.
Matthew 25:1-12 tells the story of the ten virgins. All ten were virgins but half of them were foolish. They did not keep their lamps filled while they waited for the bridegroom. In the end, only the wise virgins were ready to go to the wedding feast. The others were too late. Verses 10-12 say, “And while they went to buy, the bridegroom came, and those who were
/page(143)

ready went in with him to the wedding; and the door was shut. Afterward the other virgins came also, saying, ‘Lord, Lord, open to us!’ But he answered and said, ‘Assuredly, I say to you, I do not know you.’ ”
Matthew 7:21-23 says, “Not everyone who says to Me, ‘Lord, Lord,’ shall enter the kingdom of heaven, but he who does the will of My Father in heaven. Many will say to Me in that day, ‘Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in Your name, cast out demons in Your name, and done many wonders in Your name?’ And then I will declare to them, ‘I never knew you; depart from Me, you who practice lawlessness!’”
These scriptures give us a very sober warning. It is not enough to go to church and do good works in Jesus’ name. You cannot play games with God. Grace can be dangerous if you believe it will last forever. At the end, grace will stop and you will stand before God in judgment. Justice will be done. Honor will be given where it is due, but there are those who will suffer loss.
It is not enough to call Jesus Lord. You must do the will of the Father.
Romans 6:12-14 says, “Therefore do not let sin reign in your mortal body, that you should obey it in its lusts. And do not present your members as instruments of unrighteousness to sin, but present yourselves to God as being alive from the dead, and your members as instruments of righteousness to God. For sin shall not have dominion over you, for you are not under law but under grace.” You are commanded to resist sin and submit yourself to God.
Revelation 12:11 says, “And they overcame him by the blood of the Lamb and by the word of their testimony, and they did not love their lives to the death.” However, in Revelation 13:7, the saints were overcome by satan. “It was granted to him to make war with the saints and to overcome
/page(144)

them. And authority was given him over every tribe, tongue, and nation.” My question is: Are you an overcomer or not? The choices you make every day have consequences. You can choose to overcome the enemy by embracing your relationship with Jesus, or you can choose to let satan overcome you as you continue living in the flesh.
1 Corinthians 6:19-20 says, “Or do you not know that your body is the temple of the Holy Spirit who is in you, whom you have from God, and you are not your own? For you were bought at a price; therefore glorify God in your body and in your spirit, which are God’s.” Jesus is your Creator and your Redeemer. It cost Jesus’ life to deliver you from the penalty of sin. You are a purchased possession. Jesus has the right to be your Lord by creation and redemption. He has the right to be in total control. He wants to prepare you to reign with Him by learning to submit to Him now. Do you see the foolishness of resisting Him in any way?
Jesus has the right to be in total control of your life.
Jeremiah 10:23 says, “O LORD, I know the way of man is not in himself; It is not in man who walks to direct his own steps.” Your life will change dramatically if you simply embrace this scripture. You cannot direct your own steps if you want to walk with God.
Proverbs 28:26a says, “He who trusts in his own heart is a fool...” Your carnal man is deceitful and full of evil. It is foolish to follow your own path instead of seeking the Lord’s ways.
Messages to the Seven Churches...and to You
When the Apostle John was exiled to the Isle of Patmos, he saw the Lord. This was the same John who spent three and
/page(145)

a half years with Jesus while He was on earth. Scripture tells us they were very close. However, when John saw Jesus in His resurrected glory, he fainted because he saw the King of Kings and Lord of Lords (Revelation 1:17).
We serve the resurrected Christ! Sadly, many Christians still think of Jesus as being in the manger or on the cross. He is the risen Lord! John saw the King of the army who will destroy satan and all those who stand with him. If you do not see Jesus as the risen King of Kings, it will greatly hinder your relationship with Him.
In Revelation 2 and 3, the Lord spoke through John to the seven churches in Asia. He made specific promises to those who overcame. So I would ask you again: Are you an overcomer? If you are not yielded to Jesus and He is not your Lord, you are not an overcomer. The first thing you have to overcome is your flesh and this can only be done in the Spirit with Jesus in control. If you are an overcomer, you can rejoice in the fact that these promises are for you.
The resurrected Christ made these promises, which are conditional, so change your doctrine if you need to. It is important to look at both sides of these promises. If you overcome, you will receive the promises. However, if you do not overcome, you will not receive them.
Revelation 2:7b says, “...To him who overcomes I will give to eat from the tree of life, which is in the midst of the Paradise of God.”
Revelation 2:11b says, “...He who overcomes shall not be hurt by the second death.” The second death is at the White Throne Judgment when God’s final judgments are proclaimed (Revelation 20:11 and 14).
Revelation 2:17b says, “...To him who overcomes I will give some of the hidden manna to eat. And I will give him a white stone, and on the stone a new name written which no one knows except him who receives it.”
Revelation 2:26 says, “And he who overcomes, and keeps My works until the end, to him I will give power over the
/page(146)

nations.” Notice that being an overcomer includes keeping Jesus’ works until the end.
Revelation 3:5 says, “He who overcomes shall be clothed in white garments, and I will not blot out His name from the Book of Life; but I will confess his name before My Father and before His angels.”
Revelation 3:12 says, “He who overcomes, I will make him a pillar in the temple of My God, and he shall go out no more. I will write on him the name of My God and the name of the city of My God, the New Jerusalem, which comes down out of heaven from My God. And I will write on him My new name.”
Revelation 3:21 says, “To him who overcomes I will grant to sit with Me on My throne, as I also overcame and sat down with My Father on His throne.” What an amazing thought!
Revelation 17:14b gives a description of those who are reigning with Jesus. “...and those who are with Him are called, chosen, and faithful.” It is obvious in this scripture that there are conditions for reigning with Christ. You must ask yourself: Am I called? Have I been chosen? Most importantly, am I faithful? If you are not faithful, now is the time to repent. Now is the time to seek the Lord with your whole heart. He is eagerly waiting to teach you how to be an overcomer.
Change Your Attitude
In this chapter, I have included a few verses about the need to have an appropriate fear of the Lord, but I have barely addressed this topic. I encourage you to spend time in the Word and look up every scripture about the fear of the Lord. You need enough evidence to convince you of your stubbornness. Recognize how foolish you have been if you continue to resist Jesus’ Lordship. Do you see that it is
/page(147)

ridiculous to stand against God? Do you believe what the Word says? If you do, your life will reflect what you believe.
It is time to change your attitude toward God and stop resisting Jesus’ Lordship. You are not doing Him a favor by submitting to Him; He is doing you a favor. When He is in control, all you have to do is follow His directions. If you choose to love and obey Him, He promises to work all things to your good (Romans 8:28). God does not lie. He keeps His promises and He will bless you when you obey Him. These blessings may be in the natural realm or the eternal realm.
Produce Good Fruit
I encourage you to think like a farmer. Jesus cannot produce an abundant garden in your life until He gets rid of the stumps and rocks and plows the ground. Then He must fertilize the soil before He begins to plant good seeds. There is a season for this work. Be patient. Have hope that the seeds He has planted will start to sprout. Your labor is not in vain.
Submit your will to Jesus and let Him produce good fruit in you. The blessings He gives in the natural realm will pass away, but many blessings are for eternity. They are the most valuable. These are the ones you cannot see. If you let the Lord sow good seed in you, you will enjoy a good crop.
Ask the Holy Spirit to show you who Jesus is. He is your Savior, and He is also your Lord. God warns us not to ignore His standards. Do not be foolish and continue to believe there are no consequences for your wrong choices. God does not want you to reap bad crops so start doing what He says. Remember that He convicts you at the seed level so you do not produce a bad crop. He is trying to protect you from bearing the fruit of sin.
/page(148)

Assignment
As I mentioned earlier in this chapter, it is important to take time to search the Word for scriptures about the fear of the Lord. If you have resisted Jesus’ Lordship, you need to recognize the foolishness of this choice. Ask the Lord if you truly fear Him. If you do not, confess your sin and repent.
Ask the Lord to show you the reality of who He is. Let the Word wash your mind and spirit until you are convinced you have been rebellious. Titus 3:5 says, “Not by works of righteousness which we have done, but according to His mercy He saved us, through the washing of regeneration and renewing of the Holy Spirit.” Stop making excuses. You will find that you begin to change dramatically as the fear of the Lord is deepened in your heart.
Spend time in the Spirit pondering on the scriptures in Revelation about the need to be an overcomer. Study the promises you can look forward to if you choose to allow Jesus to work in you until you are an overcomer. There is a great heritage available to you.
/page(149)

Reference Verses for Chapter 10
Exodus 20:3 and Deuteronomy 5:7
You shall have no other gods before Me.
Proverbs 1:7a
The fear of the LORD is the beginning of knowledge...
Acts 9:31 (KJV)
Then had the churches rest throughout all Judaea and Galilee and Samaria, and were edified; and walking in the fear of the Lord, and in the comfort of the Holy Ghost, were multiplied.
Proverbs 9:10
The fear of the LORD is the beginning of wisdom, And the knowledge of the Holy One is understanding.
Jeremiah 9:23-24
Thus says the LORD: “Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, Let not the mighty man glory in his might, Nor let the rich man glory in his riches; But let him who glories glory in this, That he understands and knows Me, That I am the LORD, exercising lovingkindness, judgment, and righteousness in the earth. For in these I delight,” says the LORD.
Romans 11:22
Therefore consider the goodness and severity of God: on those who fell, severity; but toward you, goodness, if you continue in His goodness. Otherwise you will be cut off.
Galatians 6:7
Do not be deceived, God is not mocked; for whatever a man sows, that he will also reap.
Matthew 10:17-28 (KJV)
But beware of men: for they will deliver you up to the councils,
/page(150)

and they will scourge you in their synagogues; And ye shall be brought before governors and kings for my sake, for a testimony against them and the Gentiles. But when they deliver you up, take no thought how or what ye shall speak: for it shall be given you in that same hour what ye shall speak. For it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father which speaketh in you. And the brother shall deliver up the brother to death, and the father the child: and the children shall rise up against their parents, and cause them to be put to death. And ye shall be hated of all men for my name's sake: but he that endureth to the end shall be saved. But when they persecute you in this city, flee ye into another: for verily I say unto you, Ye shall not have gone over the cities of Israel, till the Son of man be come. The disciple is not above his master, nor the servant above his lord. It is enough for the disciple that he be as his master, and the servant as his lord. If they have called the master of the house Beelzebub, how much more shall they call them of his household? Fear them not therefore: for there is nothing covered, that shall not be revealed; and hid, that shall not be known. What I tell you in darkness, that speak ye in light: and what ye hear in the ear, that preach ye upon the housetops. And fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul: but rather fear him which is able to destroy both soul and body in hell.
Romans 11:16-22
For if the firstfruit is holy, the lump is also holy; and if the root is holy, so are the branches. And if some of the branches were broken off, and you, being a wild olive tree, were grafted in among them, and with them became a partaker of the root and fatness of the olive tree, do not boast against the branches. But if you do boast, remember that you do not support the root, but the root supports you. You will say then, “Branches were broken off that I might be grafted in.” Well said, Because of unbelief they were broken off, and you stand by faith. Do not be haughty, but fear. For if God did not spare
/page(151)

the natural branches, He may not spare you either. Therefore consider the goodness and severity of God: on those who fell, severity; but toward you, goodness, if you continue in His goodness. Otherwise you also will be cut off.
Romans 14:10-12
But why do you judge your brother? Or why do you show contempt for your brother? For we shall all stand before the judgment seat of Christ. For it is written: “As I live, says the LORD, Every knee shall bow to Me, And every tongue shall confess to God.” So then each of us shall give account of himself to God.
2 Corinthians 5:10
For we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that each one may receive the things done in the body, according to what he has done, whether good or bad.
1 Corinthians 3:10-15
According to the grace of God which was given to me, as a wise master builder I have laid the foundation, and another builds on it. But let each one take heed how he builds on it. For no other foundation can anyone lay than that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ. Now if anyone builds on this foundation with gold, silver, precious stones, wood, hay, straw, each one’s work will become clear; for the Day will declare it, because it will be revealed by fire; and the fire will test each one’s work, of what sort it is. If anyone’s work which he has built on it endures, he will receive a reward. If anyone’s work is burned, he will suffer loss; but he himself will be saved, yet so as through fire.
Matthew 6:19-20
Do not lay up for yourselves treasures on earth, where moth and rust destroy and where thieves break in and steal; but lay
/page(152)

up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust destroys and where thieves do not break in and steal.
Luke 19:17
And he said to him, “Well done, good servant; because you were faithful in a very little, have authority over ten cities.”
Hebrews 11:6
But without faith it is impossible to please Him, for he who comes to God must believe that He is, and that He is a rewarder of those who diligently seek Him.
1 John 1:9
If we confess our sins, He is faithful and just to forgive us our sins and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.
Galatians 6:7-8 (KJV)
Be not deceived; God is not mocked: for whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap. For he that soweth to his flesh shall of the flesh reap corruption; but he that soweth to the Spirit shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting.
John 10:10
The thief does not come except to steal, and to kill, and to destroy. I have come that they may have life, and that they may have it more abundantly.
1 Peter 4:15-18
But let none of you suffer as a murderer, a thief, an evildoer, or as a busybody in other people’s matters. Yet if anyone suffers as a Christian, let him not be ashamed, but let him glorify God in this matter. For the time has come for judgment to begin at the house of God; and if it begins with us first, what will be the end of those who do not obey the gospel of God? Now “If the righteous one is scarcely saved, Where will the ungodly and the sinner appear?”
/page(153)

Ephesians 4:30
And do not grieve the Holy Spirit of God, by whom you were sealed for the day of redemption.
2 Timothy 2:19
Nevertheless the solid foundation of God stands, having this seal: “The Lord knows those who are His,” and “Let everyone who names the name of Christ depart from iniquity.”
Galatians 6:8
For he who sows to his flesh will of the flesh reap corruption, but he who sows to the Spirit will of the Spirit reap everlasting life.
Ephesians 5:25-27
Husbands, love your wives, just as Christ also loved the church and gave Himself for her, that He might sanctify and cleanse her with the washing of water by the word, that He might present her to Himself a glorious church, not having spot or wrinkle or any such thing, but that she should be holy and without blemish.
Matthew 7:13-14
Enter by the narrow gate; for wide is the gate and broad is the way that leads to destruction, and there are many who go in by it. Because narrow is the gate and difficult is the way that leads to life, and there are few who find it.
Luke 13:24-27
Strive to enter through the narrow gate, for many, I say to you, will seek to enter and not be able. When once the Master of the house has risen up and shut the door, and you begin to stand outside and knock at the door, saying, “Lord, Lord, open for us,” and He will answer and say to you, “I do not know you, where you are from,” then you will begin to say, “We ate and drank in Your presence, and You taught in our streets.” But
/page(154)

He will say, “I tell you I do not know you, where you are from. Depart from Me, all you workers of iniquity.”
Matthew 25:1-12
Then the kingdom of heaven shall be likened to ten virgins who took their lamps and went out to meet the bridegroom. Now five of them were wise, and five were foolish. Those who were foolish took their lamps and took no oil with them, but the wise took oil in their vessels with their lamps. But while the bridegroom was delayed, they all slumbered and slept. And at midnight a cry was heard: “Behold, the bridegroom is coming; go out to meet him!” Then all those virgins arose and trimmed their lamps. And the foolish said to the wise, “Give us some of your oil, for our lamps are going out.” But the wise answered, saying, “No, lest there should not be enough for us and you; but go rather to those who sell, and buy for yourselves.” And while they went to buy, the bridegroom came, and those who were ready went in with him to the wedding; and the door was shut. Afterward the other virgins came also, saying, “Lord, Lord, open to us!” But he answered and said, “Assuredly, I say to you, I do not know you.”
Matthew 7:21-23
Not everyone who says to Me, “Lord, Lord,” shall enter the kingdom of heaven, but he who does the will of My Father in heaven. Many will say to Me in that day, “Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in Your name, cast out demons in Your name, and done many wonders in Your name?” And then I will declare to them, “I never knew you; depart from Me, you who practice lawlessness!”
Romans 6:12-14
Therefore do not let sin reign in your mortal body, that you should obey it in its lusts. And do not present your members as instruments of unrighteousness to sin, but present yourselves to God as being alive from the dead, and your members as
/page(155)

instruments of righteousness to God. For sin shall not have dominion over you, for you are not under law but under grace.
Revelation 12:11
And they overcame him by the blood of the Lamb and by the word of their testimony, and they did not love their lives to the death.
Revelation 13:7
It was granted to him to make war with the saints and to overcome them. And authority was given him over every tribe, tongue, and nation.
1 Corinthians 6:19-20
Or do you not know that your body is the temple of the Holy Spirit who is in you, whom you have from God, and you are not your own? For you were bought at a price; therefore glorify God in your body and in your spirit, which are God’s.
Jeremiah 10:23
O LORD, I know the way of man is not in himself; It is not in man who walks to direct his own steps.
Proverbs 28:26a
He who trusts in his own heart is a fool...
Revelation 1:17
And when I saw Him, I fell at His feet as dead. But He laid His right hand on me, saying to me, “Do not be afraid; I am the First and the Last.”
Revelation 2 Revelation 3
/page(156)

Revelation 2:7b
...To him who overcomes I will give to eat from the tree of life, which is in the midst of the Paradise of God.
Revelation 2:11b
...He who overcomes shall not be hurt by the second death.
Revelation 20:11 and 14
Then I saw a great white throne and Him who sat on it, from whose face the earth and the heaven fled away. And there was found no place for them...Then Death and Hades were cast into the lake of fire. This is the second death.
Revelation 2:17b
...To him who overcomes I will give some of the hidden manna to eat. And I will give him a white stone, and on the stone a new name written which no one knows except him who receives it.
Revelation 2:26
And he who overcomes, and keeps My works until the end, to him I will give power over the nations.
Revelation 3:5
He who overcomes shall be clothed in white garments, and I will not blot out His name from the Book of Life; but I will confess his name before My Father and before His angels.
Revelation 3:12
He who overcomes, I will make him a pillar in the temple of My God, and he shall go out no more. I will write on him the name of My God and the name of the city of My God, the New Jerusalem, which comes down out of heaven from My God. And I will write on him My new name.
/page(157)

Revelation 3:21
To him who overcomes I will grant to sit with Me on My throne, as I also overcame and sat down with My Father on His throne.
Revelation 17:14b
...and those who are with Him are called, chosen, and faithful.
Romans 8:28
And we know that all things work together for good to those who love God, to those who are the called according to His purpose.
Titus 3:5
Not by works of righteousness which we have done, but according to His mercy He saved us, through the washing of regeneration and renewing of the Holy Spirit.
/page(158)

Chapter 11
God Sees in Fullness
It is important to understand how God sees things. We are limited by our humanity but God is omniscient. He knows everything. He knows all that has been and all that is to come. He is not limited by time or space. God can see the end from the beginning.
God’s Word Comes to Pass
Isaiah 46:9-11 reveals truths about God that are beyond natural understanding. “Remember the former things of old, For I am God, and there is no other; I am God, and there is none like Me, Declaring the end from the beginning, And from ancient times things that are not yet done, Saying, ‘My counsel shall stand, And I will do all My pleasure,’ Calling a bird of prey from the east, The man who executes My counsel, from a far country. Indeed I have spoken it; I will also bring it to pass. I have purposed it; I will also do it.”
Isaiah 42:8-9 says, “I am the LORD, that is My name; And My glory I will not give to another, Nor My praise to carved images. Behold, the former things have come to pass, And new things I declare; Before they spring forth I tell you of them.” God has spoken many things that have come to pass.
He is now declaring new things and has promised that before they are revealed, He will tell us about them. He proclaims what He is going to do before it ever happens. The Bible is filled with the recorded history of what God has said
/page(159)

that has come to pass. Everything God promises in His Word has either been fulfilled or is in the process of being fulfilled.
In Isaiah 46:10, God says, “Declaring the end from the beginning, And from ancient times things that are not yet done, saying, ‘My counsel shall stand, And I will do all my pleasure.’ ” This does not make sense to our natural minds. How is this possible? We are restricted by time, but God is not. Before He begins the planning, He knows what the final results will be. He knows all things past, present and future. What He purposes, He brings into being.
This is not something you can comprehend with your natural understanding, but you should agree with what God says simply because He says it. Get this settled in your heart and mind. God sees everything in fullness. From the very beginning, He sees the final outcome. This is a crucial truth that will have an enormous effect on your relationship with God if you will simply believe it.
God can see the outcome of your thoughts if they are carried out in your behavior. He knows exactly what will happen if your thoughts continue as they are. He also knows the outcome if those thoughts change.
A Personal Testimony
Because God is just and holy, whatever He does is righteous and fair. It is impossible for Him to be otherwise. We do not understand this when we judge Him from our natural minds.
I began to understand this principle between the time I was born again and when I became a spiritual “toddler.” Often, when the Holy Spirit revealed truths in God’s Word, they did not make sense to my natural mind.
In the early years I wondered why the Holy Spirit convicted me about things I had not done yet. (Remember that conviction is being convinced something is wrong.) For
/page(160)

example, if I had negative thoughts about someone because of something they did to me, the Holy Spirit would convict me about my thoughts even though I had not done anything wrong outwardly. At first, that did not seem fair.
Nose Punching Parable
As an example of this principle, let me share this “parable.” Suppose when I was on a trip to your country in the past, someone treated me badly. At the time I did not react, but on returning home I began thinking about the incident. The more I thought about it, the angrier I became.
Then some time later I went back to your country again, to the same town where the incident happened. I decided that I would go to the person’s home, knock on the door, and when it opened, I would punch the guy in the nose.
At what point did the Holy Spirit convict me: when I punched him in the nose or when I decided to punch him? You know the Spirit convicted me when I purposed in my heart to sin. I thought this could not be fair because I had not punched him yet.
I am not sure about the laws of your country, but in our country you cannot be convicted for what you are thinking. If that were true, everyone would be in jail. How can this be fair? It is fair because God sees in fullness. It is also because God is love. If He convicts at the thought stage and I repent, He forgives me. Then the consequences of the sin are minimal. If He does not convict me until I punch the guy in the nose, He will still forgive me if I repent. But I will probably go to jail.
The Positive Side of “God Sees in Fullness”
If this works on the negative side, it must also work on the positive side. If God sets a mark that I am to press toward and
/page(161)

God sees I am determined to hit the mark in a lawful way (by acknowledging the Lord and letting Him direct my steps), then He looks at the fullness of my decision. He judges that I have hit the mark.
This is a vitally important principle. In the early years, I wanted to spend quality time in God’s presence and I knew sin would separate me from Him. I also knew the basic definition of sin was, “missing the mark” (Strong’s Greek #266). When I started out, there were many marks God required of me that I was missing. Technically, I was sinning. How could I ever spend quality time in God’s presence if I did not hit all of those marks?
This is another reason why it is so important that He is Lord of our lives. If I accept the marks He has set in my life and I press toward each one as He directs, then He can see the fullness of each decision. He sees that if I continue to seek Him, I will hit all of the marks. Therefore all of them are counted as righteousness to me instead of sin. They do not separate me from God’s conscious presence.
No wonder satan fights so hard to keep us from dealing with the Lordship issue! He knows that as long as we are in control, we are missing every mark God has set for us. It is counted to us as sin and it separates us from God. This is satan’s ultimate goal.
God’s Righteous Judgment
How can God be just and fair in convicting you about something you have not actually done? When you purpose in your heart to sin, God begins convicting you at that stage. You lose your peace and joy and are not able to enjoy being in God’s presence. Why? Because God looks at the fullness of your thoughts. He knows what will happen if you move forward with the sin, so He convicts you at the thought stage.
/page(162)

He judges your thoughts based on His ability to see the end from the beginning.
This is an extremely important principle. You need to understand why God convicts you about your thoughts even if you have not acted on them. As an example of this principle, look at Matthew 5:27-28 which says, “You have heard that it was said to those of old, ‘You shall not commit adultery.’ But I say to you that whoever looks at a woman to lust for her has already committed adultery with her in his heart.” Proverbs 23:7a says, “For as he thinks in his heart, so is he...”
This may seem extreme to you, but God looks at your thoughts and the intents of your heart. He sees the fullness of every thought you have. He knows the consequences that could manifest as a result of your thoughts. You should have the wisdom to trust Him when He convicts you about a thought that does not seem sinful to you. He is always just and fair.
God sees the fullness of every thought you have.
When God purposes something in His heart, He knows it will be done. When we purpose something in our hearts, He sees the fullness of that as well, whether it is good or evil. Also, when you admit your thoughts are wrong, God knows whether you truly repent when you say you are sorry or if you are merely sorry you got caught. Regardless of what you say to God, He knows whether it is the truth or not. He sees the fullness of what is in your heart and mind.
Understanding this principle provided a big breakthrough for me spiritually, and it will do the same for you. I will say it again because it is so important. God sees the end from the beginning. This is a very important truth to believe and understand when you are a young Christian. It will totally change your perspective about your relationship with God. If you have never embraced this truth, do so now! It will change your life.
/page(163)

The Definition of Sin
Many Christians think that when they sin, God gets angry at them and does not love them anymore. This is not true! Godly sorrow is intended to alert you that you have disobeyed God. It lets you know He is not pleased with you. It is like an alarm clock waking you up to the fact that you have sinned.
Sin separates you from God. God promised in 1 John 1:9, “If we confess our sins, He is faithful and just to forgive us our sins and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.” You can move right back into God’s presence when you confess your sins.
The Greek definition of sin basically means, “to miss the mark, to err or be mistaken” (Strong’s Greek #266). The mark is the standard God desires you to press toward. If you hit the mark, you are walking in obedience to God. If you miss the mark, technically you are in sin. Since sin separates you from God, it would seem you are unable to enter His presence because there are always spiritual marks you have not hit.
When you first came into God’s family, you were filled with all types of sin. You carried the guilt of the sins you had committed throughout your life. You did not confess every individual sin when you asked Jesus to be your Savior. You simply humbled yourself, cried out for mercy and asked God to forgive you.
Even though you did not confess every individual sin you had committed, God cleansed you from them all. Jesus’ blood was applied to you and God forgave all of your sins. In that moment, you moved from darkness to the light of God. You moved from guilt to a place of forgiveness, peace and joy; from sin to redemption; and from separation from God to fellowship with Him.
In Romans 14:17, Paul says, “For the kingdom of God is not eating and drinking, but righteousness and peace and joy in the Holy Spirit.” The moment you were born into God’s
/page(164)

family, you were delivered from the power of darkness into the kingdom of His Son (Colossians 1:13). You moved from condemnation to right standing with Him. You moved into the peace and joy of God’s presence all at once. All you had to do was humble yourself, confess your sins and accept what Jesus Christ did for you on the cross. You did not have to list every sin when you accepted Jesus as your Savior.
Sin and Forgiveness
Some Christians believe the forgiveness you receive at salvation covers you once and for all, and you never have to repent or seek forgiveness again. If this were true, moving into the presence of God at salvation would last forever and never change. It is true that if you had stayed in a state of humility and submission to God, you would not have had a problem with sin. However, you do sin after receiving Christ as your Savior if you yield to your flesh.
Remember, the rule is that sin separates you from the conscious presence of God, but God made the rule. Because He is God, He can make an exception to the rule. It does not change the rule. The rule is Romans 6:23a which says, “For the wages of sin is death...” The exception to the rule is Romans 6:23b which says, “...but the gift of God is eternal life in Christ Jesus our Lord.” Jesus’ forgiveness makes the exception to the rule.
When we are baby Christians, we do not understand these principles. God and His grace protect us when we are small children in His kingdom. When we are too immature to understand God’s ways, His grace covers things we might do wrong due to our lack of understanding. As we mature in Christ and understand His rules and standards, He then requires us to obey more readily. There are consequences for behaviors that were covered by grace in the past.
/page(165)

Whether or not we fully understand this principle, grace is the key factor. As soon as we repent, God extends grace to us and forgives us. There should never be long periods of time spent outside of His presence. This is true even when we are young Christians.
There are numerous godly standards we are not meeting. Ephesians 4:11-16 explains that the five-fold ministry is given for the equipping of the saints for the work of the ministry. “And He Himself gave some to be apostles, some prophets, some evangelists, and some pastors and teachers, for the equipping of the saints for the work of ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ, till we all come to the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God, to a perfect man, to the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ; that we should no longer be children, tossed to and fro and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the trickery of men, in the cunning craftiness of deceitful plotting, but, speaking the truth in love, may grow up in all things into Him who is the head—Christ—from whom the whole body, joined and knit together by what every joint supplies, according to the effective working by which every part does its share, causes growth of the body for the edifying of itself in love.” I have never met anyone who has met God’s standard perfectly. By the letter of the law, we all miss the mark.
How God Operates
If missing the mark is sin, how can you ever get into God’s presence and spend quality time there? Yes, you can repent of what God shows you and move into His presence but you are not meeting every standard God has for you. It seems that spending quality and quantity time with God would be impossible under those circumstances. It would seem it is impossible to enjoy the gift of eternal life as promised in John
/page(166)

17:3. How can you spend time with God if you are constantly missing multiple marks God has established for His people?
This would seem to create an impossible situation and many believers stumble over this point. You must understand how God operates. Let us look at a natural example that may help you see this principle. If you are a parent of multiple children, you have different standards of conduct required for each child based on their age and maturity. You do not require the same behavior from a five year old that you would from a fifteen year old. The rules are based on where they are in the growth process.
When you look at the Bible from your natural mind and see God’s many commandments, you may forget these are meant for everyone from newborn believers to mature ministers. Yes, you are required to obey God’s commandments in fullness. His laws are absolute. However, God knows exactly where you are on the journey toward reaching the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ (Ephesians 4:13). He requires an obedient heart that is eager to obey whatever He commands. What He does not choose to deal with at the present time is covered by His grace. As long as you are faithful in your journey and deal with issues when He brings them to your attention, you are in right standing with Him.
All of God’s commandments do not necessarily relate to where you are at this moment. Some of them apply in varying degrees. God does not require you to be perfect but He does command you to continually press toward the mark of His high calling (Philippians 3:14). This will manifest in different ways depending upon your spiritual “age.”
The Spirit Teaches
Again, let us look at a natural example. At the beginning of each school year, the teacher distributes books that contain
/page(167)

all of the information each child is to learn during the year. Students are not required to know everything in their books the first day. They are only required to learn each assignment as it comes and do the lessons for each day. Then by the end of the year, the contents of each book will have been learned. The information in each subject is to be acquired one assignment at a time.
In the spiritual realm, the Holy Spirit is the Teacher. Each one of us received the Spirit at the moment we were born again. He sealed our spirits and He is our Teacher from that moment until the very end. If you yield to the Lord and accept the Spirit as your Teacher, you are in right standing with God and will hear instructions from Him.
If you get an assignment from the Spirit that requires you to take five steps toward the mark this week, and you complete those steps, you are in right standing with God. The other steps in the process are covered by God’s grace. You are not required to do any assignment God has not yet given you. Your mark at that moment is not the final goal but the five steps you obeyed this week. Completing the Spirit’s assignment means you have hit the mark because God can see the fullness of your obedience.
You are only required to do what God asks of you this day or at this moment. You cannot figure this out by yourself. You must acknowledge the Lord in all of your ways. You only have to take the steps He requires. If you do that, all of the lessons that will be required of you in the future are covered. They are not counted to you as sin. Because you are walking in obedience to the Teacher, you are in right standing with God.
A Personal Example
I might decide today that I want to reach a certain mark by the end of the year. On my own I can decide what I need to do
/page(168)

each day in order to reach that mark. I might choose four or five different things each day that I intend to accomplish. The problem is that I am not authorized to be the teacher. I do not know what I need to do to reach the mark God has set for me.
If I, rather than the Lord, make the choices about what to do each day, I will never come close to the mark He has set for me. So what happens? When I choose to be lord and make my own decisions, even if they seem spiritual in nature, God immediately convicts me because He sees the future of my choices. He knows my attempts to be godly will never bring me closer to Him. Making decisions for my life (religious or otherwise) is sin, and it separates me from God.
It works in exactly the same way if I choose to submit to God, seek His will, and ask Him for directions that will bring me closer to the mark He has set for me. When I ask the Holy Spirit what to do, He will direct me in the four or five steps I need to accomplish this day in order to reach His future mark for me. When I walk in obedience to the Teacher, God sees the fullness of my choice. If I continue to listen to and obey the voice of the Lord, God sees those choices in their fullness and I hit the mark He sets for me.
Making decisions for your life (religious or otherwise) is sin, and it separates you from God.
A Critical Principle
This principle is absolutely critical. It is so important; I hope you will spend quality time meditating on it. Read the explanations repeatedly until you understand how God operates. He sees the fullness of every decision you make,
/page(169)

whether it is to obey Him in all of your ways or to disobey Him and be lord of your life.
The devil will provide you with multiple excuses (which are lies) to not trust the Lord and not yield to the Holy Spirit’s direction. If satan can convince you to direct your steps, you will continue to miss the mark God has set for you.
Under no circumstances are you ever authorized to be in control of your life. You have no idea what is needed to get to the mark of the high calling of Jesus Christ. Only God has the plan and only He knows the steps you need to take. If you direct your life, you will miss the mark in every area.
You are never authorized to control your life.
There are hundreds and thousands of steps you need to take to reach future marks in God’s kingdom. There are marks to be met each day and standards to be established over time for weeks, months and years. How can you possibly know what those steps are or how to take them? Whether you are just starting out or have walked with God for years, all you have to do is yield to the Holy Spirit. You must embrace this truth! It is simple but it is extremely profound.
Regardless of how simple or complicated the instruction is, all you are required to do is obey. All of the other things you will be required to do in the future, you are not required to do now. They are covered by grace. You are not held accountable for them at the present time. None of those future standards will cause you to be separated from God now.
Keep It Simple
One of the most important lessons I learned in my early days of walking with God was that the Holy Spirit should be my only Teacher. I was taught how to read God’s
/page(170)

Word with the Holy Spirit as the Teacher, rather than depending on denominational interpretations or personal ideas. I did not read commentaries or books by denominational leaders. I leaned on the Holy Spirit alone to reveal God’s Word to me. (I strongly suggest you do the same at the beginning. Instead of depending on someone else’s interpretations of spiritual doctrines, use the Word of God and the three infallible witnesses to confirm truth.)
Those early instructions gave me the right start in my walk with God. The things I learned from that point on were usually trial and error. When I found something that did not work, I was very quick to repent. This is another crucial principle in walking with God. When you realize you are wrong or have missed the mark, confess your sin and immediately humble yourself before God. You can move back into His presence in a moment’s time.
Be quick to repent!
I did not have good communication with the Holy Spirit at the beginning, but I kept it simple. I was not trying to grow up quickly, and I certainly was not trying to become a minister. I was not looking for blessings or gifts from God. I simply wanted a relationship with the Lord. My main focus was learning how to move into God’s presence and stay there. Although I did not realize it at the time, this was also the focus of God’s heart. His goal is to develop an intimate relationship with each one of His children.
Enjoy Being a Baby
All of the revelation I am sharing with you in this book came between the time I was born again and when I “started school.” These foundation stones were set in place when I was
/page(171)

a spiritual baby and a toddler. In the natural realm, this is the time when a child bonds deeply with his mother and father.
A newborn child is totally helpless. His every need is met by his parents. The only thing a child can do is cry to have his needs met. Often, the one person a baby can depend on is his mother. (I am speaking of a nurturing mother as opposed to one who is selfish and uncaring.)
As time passes, a child learns that his mother is not perfect. However, he knows his mother will stand by his side even when no one else will. A good mother will forgive her child’s mistakes and try to help him in any way she can. When a good mother/child relationship is established in the early years, it lasts for a lifetime.
This is what should happen when you begin a relationship with God. The first thing you should do is picture yourself crawling into your Father’s lap. This will not happen if you always look for someone else to fill your spiritual needs instead of God Himself. If you run to your spouse or your pastor every time you have a need, who then is your source of help? Even if someone shares God’s truth with you, they are not your source of help. God is. Many times believers do not develop a deep relationship with God because they always look to themselves or others for answers and directions.
In my case, there was no one around me who had the answers I needed. At the time that did not seem fair to me. I had no choice but to cry out to God. He spoke to me every time I opened my heart and sought for revelation about how to have a relationship with Him. The Lord always manifested when I needed Him.
When things went wrong in my life, I turned to God alone. Consequently, I placed all of my faith in Him, rather than depending on another person. My parents helped me and my wife helped me, but they could not come close to what the Lord Jesus provided for me by His Spirit. Because of that, Jesus became my first love.
/page(172)

Assignment
Ask the Lord to show you where your spiritual life has been hindered because you did not understand that God sees in fullness. Look at areas where He has convicted you when you did not think you were wrong. Ask Him to show you areas where you have felt condemnation because you were not obeying a commandment “perfectly.” Write down what He shows you in your notebook.
Remember the lesson about the classroom. Ask the Holy Spirit to show you what is required of you each day and simply obey Him. Repent of any areas of unfaithfulness He reveals, and start obeying where you are.
It is crucial to allow God to show you where you are spiritually. It does not matter if you have been in ministry for many years. Be honest and let the Lord reveal your true spiritual age. If you find you are in a much lower “grade” than you thought, do not get under condemnation. The Lord has always known your true spiritual level, and He is not angry with you even if you are not where you should be. In fact, He is eagerly waiting for you to see the truth so He can minister forgiveness to you. The Holy Spirit is longing to begin teaching you where you are!
/page(173)

Reference Verses for Chapter 11
Isaiah 46:9-11
Remember the former things of old, For I am God, and there is no other; I am God, and there is none like Me, Declaring the end from the beginning, And from ancient times things that are not yet done, Saying, “My counsel shall stand, And I will do all My pleasure,” Calling a bird of prey from the east, The man who executes My counsel, from a far country. Indeed I have spoken it; I will also bring it to pass. I have purposed it; I will also do it.
Isaiah 42:8-9
I am the LORD, that is My name; And My glory I will not give to another, Nor My praise to carved images. Behold, the former things have come to pass, And new things I declare; Before they spring forth I tell you of them.
Isaiah 46:10
Declaring the end from the beginning, And from ancient times things that are not yet done, saying, “My counsel shall stand, And I will do all my pleasure.”
Matthew 5:27-28
You have heard that it was said to those of old, “You shall not commit adultery.” But I say to you that whoever looks at a woman to lust for her has already committed adultery with her in his heart.
Proverbs 23:7a
For as he thinks in his heart, so is he...
1 John 1:9
If we confess our sins, He is faithful and just to forgive us our sins and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.
/page(174)

Romans 14:17
For the kingdom of God is not eating and drinking, but righteousness and peace and joy in the Holy Spirit.
Colossians 1:13
He has delivered us from the power of darkness and conveyed us into the kingdom of the Son of His love.
Romans 6:23
For the wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life in Christ Jesus our Lord.
Ephesians 4:11-16
And He Himself gave some to be apostles, some prophets, some evangelists, and some pastors and teachers, for the equipping of the saints for the work of ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ, till we all come to the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God, to a perfect man, to the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ; that we should no longer be children, tossed to and fro and carries about with every wind of doctrine, by the trickery of men, in the cunning craftiness of deceitful plotting, but, speaking the truth in love, may grow up in all things into Him who is the head—Christ—from whom the whole body, joined and knit together by what every joint supplies, according to the effective working by which every part does its share, causes growth of the body for the edifying of itself in love.
John 17:3
And this is eternal life, that they may know You, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom You have sent.
Ephesians 4:13
Till we all come to the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God, to a perfect man, to the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ.
/page(175)

Philippians 3:14
I press toward the goal for the prize of the upward call of God in Christ Jesus.
/page(176)

Chapter 12
Practical Applications
In my many years of travel, I have found that most believers make excuses for how they live. They often adjust (falsely define) God’s Word to agree with the way they think and act. It is also common for believers to focus on the mysteries in the Bible in an effort to avoid simple, basic truths that bring conviction. They use a variety of methods to excuse themselves from obeying what God has called them to do.
What Will You Do?
You can choose to deceive yourself. In fact, if you are honest with God, you will probably find you have deceived yourself many times over the years. God warns us in 1 Corinthians 3:18 not to deceive ourselves. “Let no one deceive himself. If anyone among you seems to be wise in this age, let him become a fool that he may become wise.” If you are deceived, satan has ministered to you. John 8:44c says, “...there is no truth in him. When he speaks a lie, he speaks from his own resources, for he is a liar and the father of it.”
If you realize you have been missing the truth in your life, it is because you have been living in the flesh. Instead of making excuses, be honest and repent for controlling your life from your natural mind. If you choose Jesus as your Lord and trust Him rather than depending on your reasoning, satan will not be able to deceive you.
/page(177)

Stop making excuses! Repent for controlling your life from your natural mind.
Only you can decide whether or not you want to grow up spiritually. No one can make this decision for you. Do you want to qualify for God’s plan? Then stop making excuses. You will never become who God wants you to be if you do not make some drastic changes. The first change you must make is to establish Jesus Christ as your first love and the functional Lord of your life.
At this point, you may be tired of this truth being repeated, but I am repeating it for a reason. You cannot progress spiritually if this choice is not made and maintained. I want to be sure you face this truth from your spirit, not from your mind.
Do not assume Jesus is your Lord and your first love!
Move into the Spirit through repentance, and ask God if this is the truth in your life. You may find that it is true in some areas of your life but not your whole life. Any area that is not submitted to the Lordship of Jesus Christ will greatly hinder your spiritual walk and will keep you from maturing as you should.
Do not assume that
Jesus is your Lord and your first love!
Many believers today do not take responsibility for what they do. Too often, Christians blame others if they are not where they should be spiritually. They excuse their thoughts and actions because of circumstances or the behavior of other people.
Here is the absolute truth: If you have a problem in your relationship with God, you are the problem. Look in the mirror! Face the reality of where you are and be willing to
/page(178)

do whatever is necessary to become who God wants you to be without looking for an easier way. The sooner you stop making excuses, the sooner you will begin to change.
If you have a problem in your walk with God, you are the problem.
Acts 17:28
Acts 17:28a says, “For in Him we live and move and have our being...” For the sake of clarity, I am loosely defining these terms in the following way:
Live = Being alive, abiding at home, in your own place, in a controlled environment.
Move = Leaving your home or close environment, being around friends and family in social and recreational settings.
Have your being = Operating in whatever your vocation is, whether spiritual or natural, throughout your life.
Let me ask you this question: In which of these areas is it easiest to stay in the Spirit? It is usually where you live, when you are in the controlled environment of your life or your home. The most difficult one is often to have your being in Christ at work, with coworkers and every extended area of your life.
You Must Abide
If you want to live, move and have your being in Christ, you must learn to abide in Him. John 15:1-8 goes into great
/page(179)

detail about what it means to abide in the Vine. If you want to remain in close fellowship with God and become a mature, fruitful Christian, you must understand that these instructions are not optional.
“I am the true vine, and My Father is the vinedresser. Every branch in Me that does not bear fruit He takes away; and every branch that bears fruit He prunes, that it may bear more fruit. You are already clean because of the word which I have spoken to you. Abide in Me, and I in you. As the branch cannot bear fruit of itself, unless it abides in the vine, neither can you, unless you abide in Me. I am the vine, you are the branches. He who abides in Me, and I in him, bears much fruit; for without Me you can do nothing. If anyone does not abide in Me, he is cast out as a branch and is withered; and they gather them and throw them into the fire, and they are burned. If you abide in Me, and My words abide in you, you will ask what you desire, and it shall be done for you. By this My Father is glorified, that you bear much fruit; so you will be My disciples.”
Abide is defined as, “to remain, abide, to sojourn, tarry, not to depart; to continue to be present; to be held, kept, continually...” (Strong’s Greek #3306). If you do not abide in Christ, it is impossible to produce godly fruit. Accept this fact and resist every thought that questions this truth or provides you with another way. Such thoughts come from the enemy who is trying to deceive you with ways that seem right. This simply wastes your time and satan robs more from you. Accept God’s way and move on!
Instructions
Proverbs 3:5-6 says, “Trust in the Lord with all your heart, And lean not on your own understanding; In all your ways acknowledge Him, And He shall direct your paths.” If you are familiar with what I teach, you have heard these
/page(180)

scriptures many times. These instructions are simple, but if you obey them consistently, they will change your life.
If you want to live, move and have your being in Christ, you must follow these instructions. You may not be able to do them consistently at first but keep trying! Refuse to accept a lower standard. When you realize you are not trusting the Lord or acknowledging Him in all of your ways, stop and repent quickly. As you move back into the Spirit, ask the Lord what to do next.
In the spiritual realm, you might be mature in one area but not in another. Regardless of your level of maturity, you should measure yourself as compared to Christ. Psalm 37:23- 24 says, “The steps of a good man are ordered by the LORD, And He delights in his way. Though he fall, he shall not be utterly cast down; For the LORD upholds him with His hand.” This should be the normal standard in a Christian. Your steps should be ordered by the Lord every moment of each day. Even if you fail, the Lord promises to uphold you. Simply repent and ask Him what to do next.
Jeremiah 10:23 says, “O LORD, I know the way of man is not in himself; It is not in man who walks to direct his own steps.” Because your carnal nature is corrupted by sin, satan has access to it. Jesus Christ gave you a new nature and He speaks to and directs you through the new nature. You cannot hear consistent directions from the Lord if you are in your carnal nature. The main command you will hear from Him while you are in your old nature is: “Repent!” Jesus will warn you that you are going the wrong way.
You cannot hear consistent directions from the Lord if you
are living in your carnal nature.
/page(181)

Warning!
The belief that you are automatically “in Christ” simply because you are born again is a false doctrine. When you are born again, two natures are present in you: the nature of Christ and the carnal nature (the flesh). Romans 6:16 explains that the nature you are in is based on who is controlling you. “Do you not know that to whom you present yourselves slaves to obey, you are that one’s slaves whom you obey, whether of sin leading to death, or of obedience leading to righteousness?” You abide in the new nature when you are connected to the Vine and submitted to the Lordship of Jesus Christ. You are disconnected from the Vine when you are in the flesh.
The Bible lists specific fruit that appears when you are in Christ. If you cannot maintain godly fruit, you are not abiding in Christ consistently! If you meet God’s conditions, His fruit will be produced. When you live in the flesh, ungodly fruit will be evident.
Galatians 5:22-23 lists some of the fruits of abiding in Christ. “But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, longsuffering, kindness, goodness, faithfulness, gentleness, self-control. Against such there is no law.” As I have encouraged you to do many times, come before the Lord with this list of godly fruit. Ask the Holy Spirit to show you if this fruit manifests in your life; and if so, how bountiful your harvest is. Are you bearing a little bit of fruit or an abundance of fruit? Are some of the fruits more obvious than others? Are any of these fruits nonexistent in your life, even when you are in a controlled environment? Ask your Teacher to show you details about your fruit production and what you are to do to increase it!
/page(182)

Live in Christ
In this chapter, I am defining living in Christ as how you operate in your personal life and in your home, where your environment is the most controlled. You have the power to control what goes on in your life, and to some measure, you also control the situation in your home. Even when you are in a controlled environment, you must abide in Christ! You cannot abide in Him if you do not stay in the Spirit, and you cannot bear godly fruit unless you abide.
Usually, the easiest place for godly fruit to manifest is in the controlled atmosphere of your home. Even if you must find a place in your home to be alone, it can be done. (Others in your family may not be making the same decision you are.) Practice spending time resting in the Lord. He is sitting in heaven, but He manifests in your heart by His Spirit.
You cannot abide in the Vine if you are in sin.
Remember: If you are lord, you are sinning even if you are doing religious acts or good works. The Lord Jesus should be directing your steps. His indwelling produces fruit. If you are not abiding in Christ consistently, humble yourself and repent. Ask the Lord to show you what is wrong and how to fix it.
Do not believe the lie that you can only abide in the Spirit for a long time if you are at a high level of spiritual maturity. This is not true! You were given everything you need to walk with the Lord consistently the moment you were saved.
God will show you the conditions you need to fulfill. He simply asks that you do it His way. Practice abiding in the Vine, and do not believe it will take years for this to happen. If you humble yourself before God and seek to walk in consistent fellowship with Him, you will begin to see dramatic changes in a short period of time. Your fruit will prove whether or not this work has been done.
/page(183)

What does your fruit prove? Move in Christ
For the sake of this teaching, I am defining moving in Christ as learning how to abide in the Vine when you interact with friends and family and how you function outside of your home. This includes recreational time as well.
God has commanded you to abide in Him when you interact with others, and there are no excuses for failing in this area. There may be reasons, but reasons can be eliminated through repentance. Matthew 5:16 says, “Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works and glorify your Father in heaven.”
Have Your Being in Christ
When I refer to have your being in Christ, I am talking about your profession, your job or your life responsibilities; such as student, homemaker, preacher, and any other career. These are usually the areas that give opportunity for the most pressure. God has a purpose and plan for each one of His children. You do not have to be a minister. God has a plan for every vocation. He will take you through different phases of His school as you move into your primary purpose and calling.
You need to function in the Spirit consistently even before you reach your ultimate calling in a job. Colossians 3:23 admonishes you to do whatever you do heartily as unto the Lord. The Lord also explains in 1 Corinthians 3:13: “Each one’s work will become clear; for the Day will declare it, because it will be revealed by fire; and the fire will test each one’s work, of what sort it is.”
/page(184)

You will either receive a reward or suffer loss when your works are tested by fire. Only the works done in the Spirit will pass this test. It is important to function in your responsibilities in the Spirit. Everything you do, or exert energy into, is going to be tested. Every work you do has the potential for eternal gain or loss.
Everything you do has the potential for eternal gain or loss.
The Power to Be...
Acts 1:8 says we are given the power to be witnesses. You need to be a witness at home and in your daily routines as well as in your job. Being a witness is not based only on what you say, but also who you are. If you consistently function in the Spirit, the fruit of the Spirit will manifest in your life. This is noticeable to those who do not have this fruit. Remember: What you are speaks much louder than what you say.
In 1 Corinthians 15:10 Paul says, “But by the grace of God I am what I am, and His grace toward me was not in vain; but I labored more abundantly than they all, yet not I, but the grace of God which was with me.” Everything Paul achieved in the kingdom of God was because of the grace of God. He did not choose his calling; God called him. Paul had the highest education in the religious community, but God did not consider those credentials.
In the same way, you are who you are by the grace of God. Your education or religious background does not impress God or qualify you for what He has called you to be. Every child of God must go to His school for training, just like Paul did. The Spirit is responsible to teach you. You are responsible to be teachable and obey.
/page(185)

Be Called and Chosen
Matthew 22:14 says, “For many are called, but few are chosen.” Being called is not the end; it is the beginning. Being called is the invitation. You have to accept the invitation first, and then school begins.
Romans 11:29 says, “For the gifts and the calling of God are irrevocable (KJV says without repentance).” However, there are conditions that must be met before you can function in your calling. If you are called by God but you disqualify yourself through disobedience, you will not become who God has ordained you to be. You disqualify yourself through your choices! In order to be trained and then walk in your calling, you must continually choose to live in the Spirit and obey the Lord’s commandments for your life.
You can disqualify yourself from God’s calling with your choices.
Dealing with Pressure
Each phase of maturity has a different level of difficulty. Pressure can be your friend or your enemy, depending on how you process it. Your flesh will put pressure on you to move you out of the Spirit. In the flesh, you resort to either “fight or flight.” You either resist the pressure or run away from it. This is a natural reaction. However, if you are in the Spirit rather than the flesh, you ask the Lord what He wants you to do. He may say to leave the pressure or stand against it.
The devil loves to use pressure to provoke you into moving out of the Spirit. He wants you to judge life situations and respond from your natural mind, which moves you out of the Spirit. Ephesians 6:13 says, “Therefore take up
/page(186)

the whole armor of God, that you may be able to withstand in the evil day, and having done all, to stand.”
Having done all you know how to do, stand! Do not let the enemy convince you that you have to fail simply because you are in a hard situation. 2 Corinthians 12:9 says, “And He said to me, ‘My grace is sufficient for you, for My strength is made perfect in weakness.’ Therefore most gladly I will rather boast in my infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest upon me.”
Do not give yourself permission to move into the flesh simply because of pressure. If you let the Lord teach you how to stand in the Spirit, you will find that pressure does not affect you in a negative way. Pressure may cause discomfort but it does not have to move you into the flesh. If the Spirit directs you to a place of pressure, it is because God is using the pressure to do a work in you.
Pressure does not have to move you into the flesh.
God sees the future. He knows how strong your foundation must be and how deep it must go. He will use pressure to deepen your foundation so your spiritual building can go higher. Deepening your foundation is part of qualifying for greater things in God’s kingdom.
God also uses pressure to expose hidden failings so you can see them. Then you can repent of the fruit as well as the root. Do not be discouraged if pressure causes you to manifest ungodly fruit. It is always good for you when God exposes your faults because it gives you the opportunity to remove them through repentance.
If you consistently do the fundamentals in any area, you will grow strong enough to handle any pressure. Repetition produces strength, just like strengthening a muscle. First, you work on repetition; then you add weight to build the muscle.
/page(187)

After the muscle has adapted to the greater weight, you go back to repetitions.
God will allow things you cannot handle to train you to handle more. Luke 12:48b (KJV) says, “...For unto whomsoever much is given, of him shall be much required...” If you have been given more, more is required of you. God will give you more strength as you need it but you must do your part. If you are faithful in small things, God will give you the opportunity to be faithful in greater things.
Many believers are never given the opportunity to be faithful in greater things because they do not see the value of being faithful in small things. They are not exercised and prepared for greater things because they do not learn to properly process the pressures God allows in their lives.
God’s Plans and Purposes
Ecclesiastes 3:1 says, “To everything there is a season, A time for every purpose under heaven.” When God authorizes a work to be done in a certain season, there are timings in that season. You do not know this information and that is another reason why He must be your Lord. He has the information, grace and equipment you need to be faithful in each timing and season of your life.
God knows whether or not you are strong enough to move forward into a new season. Stay where He is! Do not move out of Christ by lagging behind or getting in a rush to go forward. Always remember that God is trustworthy. He is orchestrating the seasons of your life from His love and wisdom. You can trust His plan for you!
Jesus’ kingdom is here and now by the Spirit. If you want to stand against the devil and overcome him, stay in the kingdom of God. When you choose to leave God’s kingdom by moving into the flesh, you are then subject to the rules of the fallen kingdom. In the kingdom of darkness, satan has
/page(188)

access. God limits this access to His children by His grace, but His plan is that you continually abide in the kingdom of God where He is in control.
When Jesus is functioning as your Lord, you are in the Spirit.
Practice!
Remember Proverbs 3:5-6! Acknowledging the Lord in everyday life is necessary for learning how to live consistently in the Spirit. The reason you should ask God about little, everyday decisions is because they are not difficult. Submitting to the Lord in daily life gives many opportunities to practice hearing His voice and staying in the Spirit. It also helps you recognize His voice as opposed to your own or satan’s.
As I have mentioned before, doing the basics in the little things is like toning a muscle by repetition with small weights. When strengthening a muscle, the more repetitions you do, the stronger it becomes. In the Spirit realm, the more you practice hearing the Lord’s voice consistently, the more confidence you will have that it works.
If you happen to fail in a small command, satan will try to move you out of the Spirit by overwhelming you with condemnation. When you are discouraged, you may stop practicing the daily instructions that prepare you for more difficult situations. The father of lies will also tempt you to listen to the wrong voice. (This is another reason to practice daily. Consistency in acknowledging the Lord will cause you to be more familiar with His voice and will help you recognize the enemy’s voice.)
The devil will use the same deceptions in greater areas if you do not deal with them in small areas. As you practice in
/page(189)

small things, you have more opportunities to seek the Lord about why you fail and what lies satan is using to get you off course without the lesson being costly.
Give satan No Place
Failure is part of the learning process. Do not let satan condemn you because you failed to hear and obey the Lord in a particular situation! When you failed, satan was forced to expose one of his tactics. This makes it easier for you to get to the root of the problem and deal with it. Roots may include lies you believe, selectively trusting God, or making excuses for taking over lordship. Whatever the root is, it is there as the result of you being lord of your life.
The devil cannot sow seed into you to produce ungodly fruit if you do not yield to what he is saying. He is very good at camouflaging the seeds he sows and the roots he plants so you do not recognize them for what they are, but the Holy Spirit knows everything about each one. Once again, this is why He is the Teacher!
Do not let satan condemn you
if you fail to obey in a particular situation!
When you move from every day, easier issues to harder situations, additional pressure comes. The devil will try to use cunning techniques to stop you from functioning at a higher spiritual level. You must process your mistakes correctly at every level.
There are no excuses for missing the Lord, merely reasons that can be identified. Seeking the Lord in small things allows you to find reasons why you fail. Failing in a more difficult situation exposes that your foundation is not strong enough to handle that amount of pressure. Either your
/page(190)

foundation is too shallow or it may have a weak area. Look at each situation as another opportunity to learn. If you will remain steadfast, without making excuses, the pressure will actually deepen your foundation.
Once again, let me remind you to rebuke satan’s condemning words! Your spiritual walk is none of his business. When you fail at any level, your response should be the same. Simply humble yourself before God, confess your failure, and then ask Him what to do. Expect Him to show you the areas of your foundation that need additional deepening. Learning what you are unable to do is just as important as learning what you are able to do. Take each failure (lesson) as an opportunity to learn and grow in your relationship with God.
Learning what you are unable to do is just as important as learning what you are able to do.
Let us look at the analogy of building muscle again. Many repetitions with small weights tone a muscle. However, when it is time for the muscle to get larger and stronger, you add weight and lower the number of repetitions. This actually breaks down the muscle so it can be rebuilt at a greater strength. In a sense, the muscle must “fail” (break down) before it can be made larger and stronger.
This happens in the spiritual realm as well. In order to strengthen you so you can handle greater pressure, the Lord will “add weight” you are too weak to handle consistently. When you find out why you cannot handle the weight then make the necessary corrections, you can begin to practice with greater weight. The more you practice with greater weight, the more consistent you will become. You can then begin daily toning of the extra spiritual muscle that was broken down and trained under pressure.
/page(191)

When You Fail
When you fail, it can either be because you believed or did something that was not lawful or you did not do something you should have done. Either way, it is a stumbling block. When you learn the reasons why you stumble and correct them, they become stepping stones and you grow spiritually. It is crucial to understand this process so you do not open the door to condemnation!
You should never look at this process as being negative. This is one of the most effective ways the Holy Spirit teaches you. If you are trying to do your best but you stumble, God does not get upset with you. It is an opportunity for Him to teach you. Do not let the devil condemn you because you think you are a failure. God knew you were going to fail before you tried to obey! He sees it as another opportunity to teach you so you can grow more.
Failure is an opportunity for your Father to teach you.
To your Teacher, mistakes you make are positive. So to you as His student, they should also be positive. As I mentioned earlier, it is important to know what you can do and what you cannot do. Your attitude toward the things you are going through has a major impact on the results of what you are going through. If you believe everything you experience is a God-chosen opportunity to learn something, then you can expect the Holy Spirit to reveal the reasons why you stumbled.
Everything you experience is a God-chosen opportunity to learn something.
/page(192)

1 John 4:4 says, “You are of God, little children, and have overcome them, because He who is in you is greater than he who is in the world.” God has ordained you to overcome the enemy and your flesh; however, being an overcomer does not mean you never stumble. It means you do not allow what you stumbled over to overcome you. You get up, learn the reasons why you stumbled, apply them, and then move on. You grow spiritually when you overcome stumbling blocks and turn them into stepping stones.
Turn your stumbling blocks into stepping stones!
Losing a battle from time to time does not mean you are losing the war. As long as you learn from each battle you lose, you are successful. If you maintain an overcoming attitude and obey what God teaches you in each battle, you will find you stumble less and less. This is the fruit of becoming spiritually mature.
Romans 14:12 says, “So then each of us shall give account of himself to God.” You must study to show yourself approved, a workman that does not need to be ashamed (2 Timothy 2:15). You can live in the kingdom of God where satan has no access to you. You can meet God’s standards and abide in His kingdom with the fruit to prove it. In Him, you can be safe and live your life in Christ. It is your choice.
You can live in God’s kingdom where satan has no access.
Quit making excuses. You are the problem if your spiritual life is not as it should be. Do not judge yourself and do not let satan judge you. Ask the Lord to show you what is
/page(193)

wrong and how to fix it. God will use your mistakes to teach you wonderful, eternal lessons.
There is grace for where you are and what you are learning. As soon as you move into the Spirit, you are in a safe place even if there is much work to be done! Do not let this description of professing Christians in the last days be you: “Always learning and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth” (2 Timothy 3:7).
God is eagerly waiting for you to reach out to Him. He knows more about your failings than you do and He has the answers you need. It does not matter how long you have been away from Him or how much you have struggled and stumbled. He is waiting to forgive you and show you the path of life. Remember: He has a plan for you! All you need to do is cooperate with Him.
/page(194)

Assignment
Ask the Lord to answer the following questions:
* DoIspendmostofmytimeinthefleshorinthe Spirit?
* Am I able to stay in the Spirit when at home?
* Do I move into the flesh when I interact with
others?
* Am I a witness at my job in words and behavior?
* Are others able to see godly fruit in me,
regardless of the pressure I am under?
* Do I process my failures in the Spirit or the
flesh?
* Do I struggle with condemnation?
* How can I turn stumbling blocks into stepping
stones?
/page(195)

Reference Verses for Chapter 12
1 Corinthians 3:18
Let no one deceive himself. If anyone among you seems to be wise in this age, let him become a fool that he may become wise.
John 8:44c
...there is no truth in him. When he speaks a lie, he speaks from his own resources, for he is a liar and the father of it.
Acts 17:28a
For in Him we live and move and have our being...
John 15:1-8
I am the true vine, and My Father is the vinedresser. Every branch in Me that does not bear fruit He takes away; and every branch that bears fruit He prunes, that it may bear more fruit. You are already clean because of the word which I have spoken to you. Abide in Me, and I in you. As the branch cannot bear fruit of itself, unless it abides in the vine, neither can you, unless you abide in Me. I am the vine, you are the branches. He who abides in Me, and I in him, bears much fruit; for without Me you can do nothing. If anyone does not abide in Me, he is cast out as a branch and is withered; and they gather them and throw them into the fire, and they are burned. If you abide in Me, and My words abide in you, you will ask what you desire, and it shall be done for you. By this My Father is glorified, that you bear much fruit; so you will be My
disciples.
Proverbs 3:5-6
Trust in the LORD with all your heart, And lean not on your own understanding; In all your ways acknowledge Him, And He shall direct your paths.
/page(196)

Psalm 37:23-24
The steps of a good man are ordered by the LORD, And He delights in his way. Though he fall, he shall not be utterly cast down; For the LORD upholds him with His hand.
Jeremiah 10:23
O LORD, I know the way of man is not in himself; It is not in man who walks to direct his own steps.
Romans 6:16
Do you not know that to whom you present yourselves slaves to obey, you are that one's slave whom you obey, whether of sin leading to death, or of obedience leading to righteousness?
Galatians 5:22-23
But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, longsuffering, kindness, goodness, faithfulness, gentleness, self-control. Against such there is no law.
Matthew 5:16
Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works and glorify your Father in heaven.
Colossians 3:23
And whatever you do, do it heartily, as to the Lord and not to men.
1 Corinthians 3:13
Each one’s work will become clear; for the Day will declare it, because it will be revealed by fire; and the fire will test each one’s work, of what sort it is.
Acts 1:8
But you shall receive power when the Holy Spirit has come upon you; and you shall be witnesses to Me in Jerusalem, and in all Judea and Samaria, and to the end of the earth.
/page(197)

1 Corinthians 15:10
But by the grace of God I am what I am, and His grace toward me was not in vain; but I labored more abundantly than they all, yet not I, but the grace of God which was with me.
Matthew 22:14
For many are called, but few are chosen.
Romans 11:29
For the gifts and the calling of God are irrevocable.
Ephesians 6:13
Therefore take up the whole armor of God, that you may be able to withstand in the evil day, and having done all, to stand.
2 Corinthians 12:9
And He said to me, “My grace is sufficient for you, for My strength is made perfect in weakness.” Therefore most gladly I will rather boast in my infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest upon me.
Luke 12:48b (KJV)
...For unto whomsoever much is given, of him shall be much required...
Ecclesiastes 3:1
To everything there is a season, A time for every purpose under heaven.
1 John 4:4
You are of God, little children, and have overcome them, because He who is in you is greater than he who is in the world.
Romans 14:12
So then each of us shall give account of himself to God.
/page(198)

2 Timothy 2:15
Be diligent to present yourself approved to God, a worker who does not need to be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth.
2 Timothy 3:7
Always learning and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth.
/page(199)

Chapter 13
Questions and Answers to Help You
The purpose of this book is to give you practical instructions on how to get your spiritual life in order. It is especially directed to those who have continued to struggle in their spiritual lives after years of trying to walk with the Lord. With this in mind, the following is a list of questions and answers that will help you work on the basics of living in Christ.
How is my spiritual foundation built?
Every basic truth God reveals to you becomes part of your spiritual building with Jesus Christ as the Chief Cornerstone. Foundational truths become part of your foundation. Other truths become part of your spiritual building. You must release your faith into each truth the Spirit quickens to you. Otherwise, the truths are not placed where they should go.
It is imperative to repent of everything each truth exposes in you. Unless you do, you will not be able to fully believe and receive it. This can be a quick work if you are able to believe with all of your heart and completely renounce the lies you believed before.
A root or foundational work has to be done deeply, by its very definition. This work cannot be done if your repentance is shallow and you merely want the conviction to stop. The length of time it takes for this work to be done is directly proportional to how quickly and thoroughly you
/page(200)

repent of what a truth exposes in you. If you have a habit of believing a particular lie, you have to break that habit. (A habit is done without thought because it is deeply ingrained in your mind and spirit.) If you do not break the habit, you will continually go back to what you believed before, even though you have gone through a level of repentance. Breaking habits takes time and focus. The key is to focus on consistency as you obey the truth that is opposite of the old habit.
In the process of laying foundation stones, you practice until you develop a new habit of doing or believing the truth until it becomes a part of you. You will then do the truth without thought just as you used to do the sinful thought or action before you repented. If you do not do this process correctly, you will become a hearer only, and not a doer of the Word (James 1:22).
Deception must be exposed in every area of your Christian life. Do not ever assume you have complete truth. Continually seek the Lord for more revelation, especially if you see that you have behavior and thoughts that are contrary to the Word of God.
The problem most believers have is making a minimal effort to repent of the areas the truth has exposed in them. You will never succeed in laying divine truths in your life if you merely acknowledge them mentally without going through the necessary process of repenting to the root level. You must be focused and invest the needed time before the Lord as He directs this work.
Another distraction many struggle with is trying to focus on several areas at the same time. Doing this will cause you to become overwhelmed and frustrated. Trying to fix everything at once does not work, and it usually leads to ways that seem right.
The only way for this work to be done correctly is to ask the Holy Spirit what to work on and allow Him to do the work in you as your Teacher. Focus on what He is focused on. He knows much more about what needs to be done than you do. If
/page(201)

you continue to submit to Him as your Teacher, the work will be done quickly and completely.
What are some satanic hindrances to processing truth?
If you are not in the Spirit but try to build proper spiritual foundations, you will never succeed. This work must be done in the Spirit! It cannot be done in spiritualized flesh. The devil always has access to you if you are in the flesh. He will supply unlimited ways that seem right to bring confusion and lead you in the wrong direction. He is the master of misdirection. He will lead you in ways that appear to be truth but are actually lies. This is why every thought must be brought captive to Christ (2 Corinthians 10:5) and confirmed by the Word of God, the witness of the Spirit, and the peace of God.
The devil will also distract you with condemnation by pointing out your flaws. His accusations may be true but listening to him will constantly hinder your faith. It also keeps you from believing you can actually walk in the truth God is showing you.
All of God’s children have flaws. All of us are unworthy to walk in fellowship with Him. This is where grace comes in. 1 Peter 5:5c says, “...God resists the proud, But gives grace to the humble.” He does not require perfection for us to have fellowship with Him.
When the Spirit exposes your sin and the lies you believe, satan often brings discouragement when you see all that is wrong in you. It is true that you are guilty of sin. However, the truth is that God’s grace removes the guilt of sin when you confess and repent.
God exposes your sin so you can repent and receive His forgiveness. The devil exposes your sin to prove how unworthy you are. He wants you to believe you have to get
/page(202)

rid of your flaws before you can be worthy of God’s love. This conclusion is a lie. The truth is you can receive whatever God has for you at any time based on His grace and His everlasting love for you.
When God exposes sin in you or reveals a truth that requires you to repent, at that moment He provides the grace you need to receive His forgiveness. You must believe this truth and follow the leading of the Holy Spirit for this work to be accomplished.
Explain “What you think you know hinders you...”
Once you think you know something, whether it is truth or a lie, you release your faith into it. It becomes what you believe and what you do. What you believe rules you. If you believe something to be true when it is a lie, you no longer look for any revelation on the subject because you think you already know the truth. If you are exposed to a truth directly by the Spirit, by the Word or through someone else, you will assume it is wrong because you already think you are right.
In order to grow spiritually and walk in truth, you must re-examine everything you think you know. This examination must be done by the Word and the Holy Spirit. I will say it again: This work cannot be done in spiritualized flesh. You must look at every truth you think you know without an opinion. It must be subjected to the Spirit for examination and must be checked with the three witnesses.
Take the time to re-examine everything you think you know.
/page(203)

How do I correctly see myself as God sees me?
 God loves you but He hates your sin. He opposes anything that separates you from Him. Sometimes God looks at you in regard to His purposes for you in spite of the mistakes He is covering. At other times He exposes your sin so you can see it clearly. His purpose is to change you into who He wants you to be. When God exposes sins, faults and hindrances, it is because He wants them to be dealt with.
God will encourage you by revealing how He sees you in fullness, walking in the plans He has for you. But He also wants you to see the flaws and hindrances that keep you from this fullness. God does not show you all of the flaws He can see. This would completely overwhelm you and you would give up! He will, however, give you a vision of the few things that have priority in the grade level where you are. As you yield to His corrections in these specific areas, He will continue to uncover your flaws one at a time.
God leaves the rest of your failings covered until the time He chooses to deal with them. He extends grace to cover the items that are not current issues. He also gives abundant grace to make the necessary changes in the areas He is currently working on. This process will continue the rest of your life.
Remember that satan will try to hinder this work any way he can. He will focus on your flaws and mistakes and condemn you. He will also go to the other extreme and focus on God’s grace, thus eliminating your accountability for sin. He will say, “God loves you just the way you are.” This is true, but it is not the truth. God loves you in spite of your sin. He uncovers sins in His timing because He loves you and wants to remove everything that hinders your fellowship with Him.
/page(204)

How do I increase my desire to know God?
You need to see the big picture. At every level of maturity, God wants to produce a dramatic effect on your life. If you stop seeking God, the cost to you now and in the future is beyond anything you can imagine. If you choose to believe this truth, you will be stirred up to keep pressing on.
The devil wants to trick you by enticing you to look at the short term cost of mortifying your flesh and seeking God with your whole heart. This will cause you to slow down spiritually or stop seeking God altogether.
Do not allow satan to steal from you in this way. His goal is always to steal, kill and destroy (John 10:10). He will take every opportunity to steal what God has ordained for you. Being aware of this should also increase your zeal for seeking God.
The number one reason to seek God is because you love Him. If you find that you do not seek God, obey Him or yield to His Lordship, it is because you do not love Him. This may sound harsh to you, but it is the truth. If you struggle in this area, ask God to show you how satan is hindering you and also the ways your carnal nature is keeping you from seeking God.
There is a battle for your soul. The enemy does not give up simply because you are a believer and have sought God to some measure. Your flesh is equally resistant to moving deeper into Christ because to do so, it must die. Romans 8:13 says, “For if you live according to the flesh you will die; but if by the Spirit you put to death the deeds of the body, you will live.” The question is: Will you overcome or will you give in to satan and your flesh?
/page(205)

If Jesus is not my first love, what should I do?
1 John 4:19 says, “We love Him because He first loved us.” If you find you do not love Jesus as you should, it is because you have not learned to receive His love for you. You must deal with the reasons why you cannot receive His love.
Search the Word to see ways God expresses His love to His children. Ask the Lord why you are unable to receive His love. Meditate on the ways He has already shown His love to you. First and foremost, He died for you. There is no greater love than this.
You must face the fact that the reason you do not have more of His love is you. God is never the problem. His love is limitless. Accept that you are the problem and humble yourself before your Father. Ask God to show you reasons why He is unable to fully manifest His love to you. When He shows you these hindrances, remove them through repentance.
If you have failed in walking with the Lord for many years, you may believe God has stopped loving you. Instead of believing this lie, believe Romans 8:38-39. “For I am persuaded that neither death nor life, nor angels nor principalities nor powers, nor things present nor things to come, nor height nor depth, nor any other created thing, shall be able to separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.” God’s love lasts forever because He is love. A lack of love from God is never the problem. The hindrance is always in you. You have to examine what you believe about His love.
God’s love is perfect. However, hindrances can stop the flow of His love. Those hindrances can be removed through repentance. God loves you and wants to express His love to you. He will gladly show you any hindrance that keeps you from enjoying His love. God will not force His love on you. He will pour His love into you to the measure you open your heart in trust and obedience.
/page(206)

Many things are wrong with me. Where do I start?
When God shows you sins, habits and beliefs that hinder your relationship with Him, His motive is always to express love to you. You must release your faith into this truth, not what you may be feeling at the moment. Hebrews 12:6 tells us that every child whom the Lord loves, He chastens. You must choose to believe this truth.
If you choose to believe the truth, satan will not be able to hinder you from furthering your walk with God. However, if you do not believe the truth, satan will provide you with something else to believe. Whenever you release your faith into his lies, more hindrances will be produced.
Any lie you believe hinders your faith. The father of lies is an expert at misdirecting your faith into lies disguised as truth. If you do not release your faith into truths God has revealed and confirmed, you will constantly believe ways that seem right. This is why it is imperative to examine everything you believe by using the three witnesses. You must examine everything you believe to be true. This work can only be done in the Spirit.
As you begin to pursue a deeper relationship with the Lord, write down the reasons why you are not currently able to hit the mark God has set for you. As you press toward Him, hindrances will manifest. Stop and deal with them one at a time. Do not be overwhelmed, because God knows exactly where you are. He knows every detail of your hindrances, including those you are unaware of.
Every one of us has multiple hindrances that must be dealt with. Each one you deal with allows you to mature in the kingdom of God. His love is constant, and He brings correction for your good. If you process the hindrances God exposes in a lawful way, God always looks at you in the fullness of grace. You, by grace, are considered to have met the mark and can enjoy fellowship and communion with God.
/page(207)

However, if you ignore the hindrances God is exposing, you are considered to be missing the mark. Any time you ignore God’s efforts to expose hindrances and failings in you, you are in the flesh. If you continue to live in the carnal nature, you will not move toward the mark of the high calling of Jesus Christ.
Remember: It is extremely important to accurately process what God reveals to you when you have a list of failures. Prioritize what you need to work on in the Spirit. Let Him guide you as this work is completed in you.
There is a time and place for everything. Trust God’s timing. It is perfect. If the Spirit is not leading as you work through a revelation, ask Him if you should move to something else. It is the Holy Spirit's job to start and end each lesson. Find out what the Lord is authorizing next. Do not study if the Spirit is not teaching! Doing “more” in spiritualized flesh merely adds another hindrance and always leads to ways that seem right. Stop going down the wrong road!
How do I give God the master key to my life?
Giving God the master key to your life means you choose Jesus to be your Lord as well as your Savior. You must choose with your whole heart rather than making a superficial decision. When you decide to give God the master key to every area of your heart and life, you give Him the authority to deal with any and every part of your life.
An example of this would be a 1000 room hotel. When using the master key, you can go into any room of the hotel, even if it has been locked by the key to the room. You need to take the position that you will not resist the Lordship of Jesus Christ regardless of what area He chooses to focus on. The greater includes the lesser; that is, the master key overrides all of the keys to every “room” of your life.
/page(208)

You are only responsible to work on whatever God chooses to open and reveal. All other “rooms” are covered by grace. Even current areas are covered when the day’s lesson is finished. It is not an issue until He gives a new assignment.
Decide once and for all that Jesus is in control. If this decision has already been made, it is not a problem when a new area is revealed. Trusting God with your whole heart means you do not limit your trust based upon understanding or emotions. Instead you choose to believe what God says. When you do this, it works for your good whether you can see it or not.
Obeying Proverbs 3:5-6 means you do not have to know what is in an unopened room until He opens it with the master key. His job is to decide what needs to be fixed in the room. Then you can go into a different room that has been cleaned and enjoy fellowship with the Lord. Cleaning in one room and communion in another room can take place at the same time.
If you feel condemned, you have stayed in the dirty room by taking over lordship when the Spirit moved somewhere else. What you know or do not know is not important. Your faithfulness is the key! Seek to know and fellowship with the Lord daily and explore how He works in you. Ask God to give you eyes to see Him in all aspects of your life.
How do I become spiritual?
Before you can be trained and educated in the spiritual realm, you must learn to abide in the kingdom of God. Because you have accepted Jesus as your Savior, you have already moved into the kingdom of light. It is by grace through faith that you are a child of God. This authorizes you to abide in His kingdom.
Accept His cleansing and forgiveness. Jesus has done all that is necessary for you to qualify to be in the kingdom.
/page(209)

Anything you do to add to or take away from His provisions disqualifies you. Learn to abide!
Psalms 46:10 says to be still before God. James 1:19 says to be quick to listen, slow to speak and slow to wrath. A lack of obedience to these two scriptures will immediately take you out of the kingdom of God. The most difficult part of walking with God is learning to do nothing other than believing and obeying what God says.
Your natural life focuses on being busy trying to accomplish things. Your spiritual life focuses on trusting in everything God has done. The work He does in you is by grace alone. Anything you try to do hinders grace and its benefits.
The key is to constantly focus on the fundamentals of having a proper motive (love for God) and the Lordship of Jesus Christ. If the basics are not working, there are hindrances in the way. Ask the Holy Spirit to reveal these hindrances and show you what to do. This is a step-by-step process.
If you cannot stay in the Spirit, there are reasons. You should be able to stay in the Spirit all of the time. The Spirit is responsible to show you any hindrances that interfere with your spiritual walk. Do not be afraid. Continue to put your trust in the Lord and His work in your life.
If you cannot do what God has authorized you to do, you are the problem. You cannot solve the problem in your natural man. You are responsible to accept God’s standard every day, believe it can be accomplished in you, and present yourself to the Holy Spirit for this work to be done.
Conviction and repentance play a big part in becoming spiritual, and this work should be embraced. Conviction should be processed in the presence of God. He convicts you because it is time to deal with a particular area. He does not convict you because He is angry or disappointed with you. When conviction is processed at the Holy Spirit’s direction, grace should continue to flow. However, the moment you begin resisting this work, communion with God stops.
/page(210)

Do not make assumptions about what your problem is. Bring every thought captive to Jesus Christ. Obey 2 Corinthians 10:5 (KJV). “Casting down imaginations, and every high thing that exalteth itself against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ.”
When you are convicted, you must go to the root of the problem. The taproot is always your lordship. Yes, it is important to confess the fruit of your sin. However, the root must be dealt with and it is always the same. You sinned because you took over lordship. Repent of the root! Then move back into the Spirit and yield to Jesus’ Lordship. When you are back in God’s presence, the Spirit will show you how and why you took over lordship and how to fix it. This work is to be done in the classroom with the Teacher!
The devil continually brings destruction into the lives of Christians because they process conviction in the flesh (where he has access) instead of repenting and working through the issue while in the presence of God. It is God’s responsibility to correct His children and satan should have no part in this important work! Your responsibility is to follow the Spirit’s instructions and process God’s correction as directed by Him. Embracing this truth will change your life in a miraculous way, and you will see major changes in your walk with God if you begin to process conviction and repentance correctly.
How do I trust the Lord with my whole heart?
First of all, you must decide to trust God. Trusting God is a choice, not an emotion. When you choose to trust Him with your whole heart, this does not mean all of the areas of your heart are dealt with. God sees in fullness. Your heart should say, “As He directs I will follow.” Decide once and for all, not in individual instances. When you see new areas in which
/page(211)

you have not yet been required to trust Him, simply maintain your initial decision.
Think of it as if you are signing a legal contract with God that is filled with blank pages. You agree to trust and obey everything God says, and He fills in the pages with whatever He wants. The key is remembering that God fills in each page in His timing, not you. Regardless of what He puts on the pages or when He fills them, you are already under contract. You have already signed the agreement. Your answer is “yes” before you even ask Him a question. If you are afraid of what God might say or hesitate to obey, you have already broken the contract.
For a contract to be valid, both parties must keep the conditions. If you do not do your part, God is not bound by the contract. God’s part of the contract is to direct you, work all things to your good, and make all of the necessary provisions for you to fulfill your part. Your part is to simply love and obey Him.
God will always do His part. Trust Him without setting conditions or boundaries. If it does not appear that God is doing His part, either you misunderstood His part or you have not met the conditions for Him to do His part. He may do His part by grace but you do not have any guarantee of this.
How do I break free from the snares of the devil?
2 Timothy 2:24-26 says, “And a servant of the Lord must not quarrel but be gentle to all, able to teach, patient, in humility correcting those who are in opposition, if God perhaps will grant them repentance, so that they may know the truth, and that they may come to their senses and escape the snare of the devil, having been taken captive by him to do his will.” If you are unable to consistently walk in the Spirit, this is evidence satan has been able to take you captive at his will.
/page(212)

How does he do this? What can you do to become free?
The devil’s ability to ensnare you begins with him enticing you to resist Jesus’ Lordship. If satan succeeds in this, then he has disqualified you from abiding in Christ and walking in the Spirit. At this point, you have no option but to operate out of your natural, carnal nature.
The devil baits his snares with lies that are disguised as truth. In order to lead you to the bait and the snare, he brings thoughts that seem right to your mind. These thoughts may be facts or even scriptures about a certain subject that you are interested in. He will bring thoughts in ways that lead you into deception, while leaving out other critical facts or scriptures.
He does this to bring you to a conclusion (the bait in the snare) that is a lie rather than the truth. Once you believe his conclusion on the subject, you release your faith into it. The trap is sprung and you are taken captive in his snare. He has stolen the truth from you on that specific subject. From that time on, you think you have the truth so you stop searching for any more revelation on that subject. That is the bad news.
The good news is that God still loves you, even when you are deceived, and He wants you to be free. John 8:32 says, “And you shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free.” John 8:36 says, “Therefore if the Son makes you free, you shall be free indeed.” Jesus and His truth set you free from the lies of the enemy.
2 Timothy 2:25b-26a explains how we can free ourselves. “...If God perhaps will grant them repentance, so that they may know the truth, and that they may come to their senses and escape the snare of the devil...” When you repent, you can receive the truth that will set you free from satan’s snares. Let me say it again: The key you need to free yourself is truth. Only God can give you ears to hear truth. If you humble yourself and repent of being lord, then He will give you ears to hear the truth.
You must study the Word and seek God for truth without any preconceived, religious ideas. When God gives you ears to
/page(213)

hear a particular truth, it will expose a lie you have believed and been ensnared by. The truth is the key to unlock the snare. First you must choose to quit believing the lie. When you do, your faith will return to you. Then you must make the choice to believe and yield to the truth. The moment you do this properly, the snare is opened and you are free.
Every truth shared in this book has set me free from the snares that held me captive. Now I am free to be a servant of the Lord. Every truth (key) in this book that God gives you ears to hear will enable you to free yourself from the snares satan has used to hold you captive. Take the time to thank God for His grace, mercy and love that gives you ears to hear. Completely yield to the Lord through the Holy Spirit to process each truth He gives you.
I look forward to hearing testimonies from you about your newfound freedoms!
/page(214)

Reference Verses for Chapter 13
James 1:22
But be doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving yourselves.
2 Corinthians 10:5
Casting down arguments and every high thing that exalts itself against the knowledge of God, bringing every thought into captivity to the obedience of Christ.
1 Peter 5:5c
...God resists the proud, But gives grace to the humble.
John 10:10
The thief does not come except to steal, and to kill, and to destroy. I have come that they may have life, and that they may have it more abundantly.
Romans 8:13
For if you live according to the flesh you will die; but if by the Spirit you put to death the deeds of the body, you will live.
1 John 4:19
We love Him because He first loved us.
Romans 8:38-39
For I am persuaded that neither death nor life, nor angels nor principalities nor powers, nor things present nor things to come, nor height nor depth, nor any other created thing, shall be able to separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.
Hebrews 12:6
For whom the LORD loves He chastens, And scourges every son whom He receives.
/page(215)

Proverbs 3:5-6
Trust in the LORD with all your heart, And lean not on your own understanding; In all your ways acknowledge Him, And He shall direct your paths.
Psalm 46:10
Be still, and know that I am God; I will be exalted among the nations, I will be exalted in the earth!
James 1:19
So then, my beloved brethren, let every man be swift to hear, slow to speak, slow to wrath.
2 Corinthians 10:5 (KJV)
Casting down imaginations, and every high thing that exalteth itself against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ.
2 Timothy 2:24-26
And a servant of the Lord must not quarrel but be gentle to all, able to teach, patient, in humility correcting those who are in opposition, if God perhaps will grant them repentance, so that they may know the truth, and that they may come to their senses and escape the snare of the devil, having been taken captive by him to do his will.
John 8:32
And you shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free.
John 8:36
Therefore if the Son makes you free, you shall be free indeed.
/page(216)
